Health economic consequences of reducing salt intake and replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat in the adult Finnish population: estimates based on the FINRISK and FINDIET studies
#https://www.nature.com/articles/ejcn201178
To predict the health economic consequences of modest reductions in the daily intake of salt (−1.0 g per day) and replacement of saturated fat (SFA, −1.0 energy percent (E%)) with polyunsaturated fat (PUFA, +1.0 E%) in the Finnish population aged 30–74 years.
A Markov model with dynamic population structure was constructed to present the natural history of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) based on the most current information about the age- and sex-specific cardiovascular risk factors, dietary habits and nutrient intake. To predict the undiscounted future health economic consequences of the reduction of dietary salt and SFA, the model results were extrapolated for the years 2010–2030 by replacing the baseline population in the year 2007 with the extrapolated populations from the official Finnish statistics. Finnish costs (€2009, societal perspective) and EQ-5D utilities were obtained from published references.
During the next 20 years, a population-wide intervention directed at salt intake and dietary fat quality could potentially lead to 8000–13 000 prevented CVD cases among the Finnish adults compared the situation in year 2007. In addition, the reduced incidence of CVDs could gain 26 000–45 000 quality-adjusted life years and save €150–225 million over the same time period.
A modest reduction of salt and replacement of SFA with PUFA in food products can significantly reduce the burden of CVD in the adult Finnish population. This impact may be even larger in the near future due to the ageing of Finnish population.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in industrialised countries, causing high health care utilisation costs. Elevated systolic blood pressure (SBP), total cholesterol (TC) and smoking are the best known major risk factors of CVD (Vartiainen et al., 2010). SBP (>115 mmHg) is the single most important cause responsible for >60% of strokes and ∼50% of coronary heart disease events, whereas corresponding figures for elevated TC (>3.8 mmol/l) are around 20% and >50%, respectively (World Health Report, 2002).
The population-wide reduction in dietary salt and replacement of dietary saturated fat (SFA) with polyunsaturated fat (PUFA) are essential in reducing CVD incidence. Their importance is mediated at least in part by the effect of salt on blood pressure (BP) and dietary fat quality on total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. The risk of CVD events increases progressively with increasing BP and cholesterol. The major portion of CVD deaths attributable to BP and cholesterol occurs in the upper range of ‘normal’ BP and TC levels (that is, BP >130/80 mmHg and TC >3.8 mmol/l; He and MacGregor, 2009).
In Finland, around 75% of the observed decline in coronary mortality in middle-aged men can be explained by decreases in BP, TC and smoking (Vartiainen et al., 2010). Even though public health interventions aimed at these risk factors have dramatically decreased CVD disability and deaths in developed countries (He and MacGregor, 2009), CVD is still the most common cause of death, and stroke and acute myocardial infarction (MI) are major causes of disability. Despite marked changes in diet since the 1970s, average dietary intake of salt (8.4 g per day and 6.1 g per day for men and women, respectively) and SFA (12.7 E% per day for both sexes) are still above recommended levels (<5 g per day and <10 E%), with relatively low PUFA intake (World Health Organisation, 2007; Paturi et al., 2008). Therefore, modest reduction of dietary salt and improvement of dietary fat quality, with even small shifts in the population distributions of SBP and TC towards lower values, may improve the health economic consequences of CVD substantially.
No detailed analyses on the economic consequences of reducing dietary salt and improving dietary fat quality intake have been carried out in the adult Finnish population. This study aims to predict the potential health economic consequences of moderate reduction of dietary salt combined with replacing some dietary SFA by PUFA. Owing to the data limitations, the analysis was restricted to Finns aged 30–74 years.
The model was calibrated by comparing the model results to the actual number of patient in the different health states in the year 2007. For example, according to the FINRISK 2007 study, the prevalence of people with history of stroke and MI is between 59 900–68 800 and 53 800–63 300 individuals among the Finnish population aged 30–74 years old, respectively (Peltonen et al., 2008). The calibrated model estimated that the number of people with history of stroke is around 61 100 and the number of people with history of MI is ∼58 300. Thus, on average, the calibrated model was considered to be sufficiently accurate to reproduce the baseline population for the year 2007.
Over 20 years, a population-wide intervention could potentially prevent 8000–13 000 CVD cases among the Finnish adults aged 30–74 compared with the status quo scenario, where the CVD risk factors stay at the year 2007 levels over time. In addition, the reduced incidence of CVD cases could yield an additional 26 000–45 000 quality-adjusted life years and save 150–225 million Euros over the same time period. Detailed results of base case and additional one-way sensitivity analyses are presented in Table 2. Owing to the linearity assumption of effects, the approximations of outcomes with different reduction levels are easily extrapolated based on the results presented in Table 2. For example, reducing the daily intake of both dietary salt and SFA by 0.5 U would lead to around 74–113 million Euros savings during the next 20 years.
To take the uncertainty of model parameters into account, the probability of obtained cumulative savings was estimated. Figure 2 shows that in the base case scenario there is >95% chance that the cumulative total savings with and without productivity losses are at least 130 and 115 million Euros between the years 2010 and 2030, respectively. In addition, sensitivity analyses showed that the independent effect of salt reduction in the prevention of cardiovascular events is larger than the effect of replacing SFA by PUFA (Table 2). The reduction of dietary salt is explained by >99% of changes in the incidence of CVD events and their consequences. However, when the Keys equation was used to predict the changes in TC, the reduction of dietary salt explained only around 62% the changes in the number of CVD cases. Thus, the interpretation of results needs to be carried out with care, as the results are sensitive to the selection of effect size estimates.
Probability of cumulative savings (with and without productivity losses) given a dietary salt and saturated fat reduction of 1 g and 1 E% per day (base case scenario) among Finnish adults aged 30 to 74 between years 2010and 2030. PL=productivity losses included.
This study demonstrated that even a modest reduction of dietary salt and replacement of dietary SFA with PUFA would have a great impact on the incidence of CVD events among the population aged 30–74 years. The lower number of CVD events would result in substantial gains in quality-adjusted life years and cost savings.
The results of this study agree with previous studies (Selmer et al., 2000; Murray et al., 2003; Bibbins-Domingo et al., 2010; Smith-Spangler et al., 2010) that have demonstrated the potential benefits of salt reduction to reduce the burden of CVD. However, none of these previous studies have directly estimated the joint effects of reducing both salt and SFA intake simultaneously, considered here.
A strength of this study is that cardiovascular risk factors, dietary habits and nutrient intake of the Finnish population aged 30–74 years were obtained from a well-characterised and representative sample of Finnish adults (Paturi et al., 2008; Peltonen et al., 2008), and the cost and quality of life estimates were obtained from representative studies.
In the analysis, the independent role of dietary salt reduction of 1 g was larger than the role of a 1 E% change of SFA to PUFA. This is because both the effect sizes obtained from the literature differ and also the β-coefficients of FINRISK functions for the association of SBP with both CVD events and deaths are more significant than for the corresponding association of serum TC with CVD cases. This is in part because serum TC is not included in the FINRISK function that predicts the risk of stroke. In contrast, SBP is a major risk factor for both stroke and MI. The analyses also assume that dietary fat quality mediates its effects on CVD risk solely via effects on lipids. However, dietary fat quality may influence CVD risk by mechanisms other than cholesterol (Erkkilä et al., 2008), and the relatively strong inverse associations of PUFA intake and the PUFA/SFA ratio with coronary heart disease or CVD risk from some prospective cohort studies (Hu et al., 1997; Laaksonen et al., 2005; Erkkilä et al., 2008) also implies that dietary fat quality impact cardiovascular risk more than would be predicted by effects on the lipid profile alone.
This study focused on replacement of SFA with PUFA. Because replacement of SFA with monounsaturated fat yields similar effects on the lipid profile (Clarke et al., 1997), results would have been similar if monounsaturated or other unsaturated fat had been used in place of PUFA.
As the results of this study are based on statistical computer modelling requiring several assumptions, the results should be interpreted cautiously. This study did not specify any particular intervention aiming to reduce the dietary salt and SFA intake from daily food. However, the modest reductions presented here could be achieved by voluntary actions of the food industry aimed at a reducing the use of salt and SFA in processed food, a major source of dietary salt and SFA (Paturi et al., 2008). There are already examples about successful strategies that have managed to reduce the intake of salt and SFA in cooperation with the food industry (Prättäla, 2003; Laatikainen et al., 2006; Food Standard Agency, 2008; Pietinen et al., 2008). These interventions, for example, have managed to reduce the intake of salt by 10–25% (Laatikainen et al., 2006; Food Standard Agency, 2008).
We assumed no changes in consumer behaviour and persistence associated with these modifications, and dramatic changes in consumer behaviour would be unlikely, given that a reduction of dietary salt, for example, by 10–15% is possible without detection (Girgis et al., 2003; Ruusunen and Puolanne, 2005). Moreover, after an adaptation period people appear to prefer food with less salt (Blais et al., 1986).
To ensure the robustness of the study results, the study population was restricted to people aged 30–74 years. However, >50% of CVD cases occurs among the population aged ⩾75 in Finland, so an important segment of the Finnish population could not be modelled. The impact in the whole population is, thus, clearly underestimated. However, at the moment there are no epidemiological data available to inform the association between CVD risk factors and the risk of CVD events among the elderly in Finland. The reduction of dietary salt and SFA is likely to benefit also subjects aged <30 years, which will potentially decrease the future prevalence of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia in older age groups.
Moreover, there were no relevant estimates available for the proportion of patients provided assisted care or care in institutions such as nursing homes after non-fatal stroke or MI. Therefore, the cost of institutionalisation, which is especially important following stroke, has not been considered in the analysis. Also, potential changes in the number of patients with heart failure, end-stage renal disease or dementia (Kivipelto et al., 2006; Solomon et al., 2010) were not considered in the analysis due to the lack of data.
This analysis assumes that CVD risk factors stay at the same levels as they were in year 2007. However, if the declining trend in the levels of CVD risk factors seen in 1972–2007 (Vartiainen et al., 2010) will continue unabated, the burden of CVD may not increase as much as presented in this study. On the other hand, the current epidemic of obesity and type II diabetes may have a negative impact on the trends seen in CVD incidence over the past several decades (Poirier et al., 2006). Finally, the assumed linear relationships between salt and SFA intakes and SBP and TC may not hold, and there is evidence that reductions in BP could be even greater at lower levels of salt intake (Sacks et al., 2001). An underestimate of the true amount of future cost savings and improved health at the population level may thus have resulted from these modelling assumptions.
