The cost-effectiveness of shopping to a predetermined grocery list to reduce overweight and obesity
#https://www.nature.com/articles/nutd201318
Pre-commitment strategies can encourage participants to commit to a healthy food plan and have been suggested as a potential strategy for weight loss. However, it is unclear whether such strategies are cost-effective.
To analyse whether pre-commitment interventions that facilitate healthier diets are a cost-effective approach to tackle obesity.
Effectiveness evidence was obtained from a systematic review of the literature. For interventions demonstrating a clinically significant change in weight, a Markov model was employed to simulate the long-term health and economic consequences. The review supported modelling just one intervention: grocery shopping to a predetermined list combined with standard behavioural therapy (SBT). SBT alone and do nothing were used as comparators. The target population was overweight or obese adult women. A lifetime horizon for health effects (expressed as quality-adjusted life years (QALYs)) and costs from the perspective of the UK health sector were used to calculate incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs).
In the base case analysis, the pre-commitment strategy of shopping to a list was found to be more effective and cost saving when compared against SBT, and cost-effective when compared against ‘do nothing’ (ICER=£166 per QALY gained). A sensitivity analysis indicated that shopping to a list remained dominant or cost-effective under various scenarios.
Our findings suggest grocery shopping to a predetermined list combined with SBT is a cost-effective means for reducing obesity and its related health conditions.
Recent European Union statistics revealed that the United Kingdom has more obese women (24%) than any other member state.1 Overweight and obesity was responsible for 7.3% of morbidity and mortality in the United Kingdom in 2002 and contributed an estimated £3 billion in direct health costs to the National Health Service (NHS).2 A systematic review of evidence from mostly high income countries suggests that obesity alone accounts for 1–3% of national health care expenditure.3 Current public health approaches to tackling obesity, which have largely focussed on information provision and health education, have not been particularly effective in reversing the obesity epidemic. Recent findings suggest that behavioural economics may offer alternative approaches to improving everyday decisions people make about the foods they consume, exercise habits and their health more generally.4, 5 The behavioural economics literature recognises that very often, people’s actual behaviour departs significantly from their intended behaviour. For example, many consumers know all too well that overeating and under-exercising will lead to weight gain and increased risk of chronic illness. Many consumers take the further step of forming an intention to improve their diet and increase activity levels. However, in many cases impulsiveness or poor self-control leads people to behave in a manner that departs from their good intentions.5 This has been described in the consumer behaviour literature as a struggle between the want self and the should self,6 or between the psychological forces of desire and willpower.7
Pre-commitment (or commitment) mechanisms could assist individuals who have difficulty sticking to a healthy eating plan, by removing future temptations to deviate from the plan.4, 8 In other words, they could be used to protect long-term health goals from short-term consumption decisions.9 Preselecting menu items in school or work cafeterias, pre-ordering grocery items on supermarket websites, and preselecting the list of food items to buy at the supermarket are examples of strategies to constrain oneself from giving in to future unhealthy temptations. One advantage of such strategies (unlike more paternalistic approaches such as food/drink bans or fat taxes) is that they nudge people towards making better decisions, while safeguarding individuals’ freedom of choice.4 There have been a few attempts to evaluate the impact of these types of pre-commitment mechanisms on consumption behaviour. For example, one study found that shoppers of an online grocer were more likely to purchase ‘should’ choices (healthier foods) when they ordered for home delivery farther into the future than when they ordered for delivery sooner.10 Despite some evidence that pre-commitment devices can assist with healthier decisions, little is known about the long-term cost-effectiveness of such strategies.
The aim of this study is to determine whether pre-commitment strategies from the existing literature are likely to be cost-effective in facilitating healthier diets, weight loss and ultimately better health among overweight individuals.
The results of the cost-effectiveness analysis for the base case and best/worst case scenarios are presented in Table 1. Results show that the SBT+list pre-commitment intervention dominates the SBT intervention in the base case, producing greater health gains at a lower cost. When compared against the do nothing option, the SBT+list intervention yields an ICER of £166 per QALY. This ICER is well below the threshold of £20 000 per QALY, below which interventions are deemed cost-effective by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,27 suggesting the SBT+list intervention is cost-effective.
Under the best case scenario, the SBT+list intervention dominates both SBT and do nothing, improving outcomes at lower cost. Under the worst case scenario, the intervention still yields more QALYs than both SBT and the do nothing alternative, but at a higher cost. The resulting ICERs for the SBT+list intervention (£1720 per QALY against SBT and £2455 per QALY against the do nothing alternative) suggest the intervention remains cost-effective even under the worst case scenario.
The ICERs from one-way sensitivity analyses are shown in Table 2. The additional benefit from these analyses over and above the best/worst case sensitivity analyses is that it allows us to identify parameters that are the key drivers of any uncertainty. Pre-commitment via the SBT+list intervention either dominated or remained cost-effective under all scenarios. The results were more sensitive to changes in the treatment effect, interventions costs and disease state costs. Varying the other parameters in the model made little difference to the base case results.
The total incremental weight loss achieved by the pre-commitment intervention of shopping to a list was small and of short duration owing to the tendency for weight regain and (potentially conservative) extrapolation of continued weight regain after trial. Despite the assumption of a return to baseline weight following the intervention, the pre-commitment intervention of shopping to a list, when combined with SBT was found to be cost saving compared with SBT alone and cost-effective compared with the do nothing alternative. These findings provide preliminary evidence that shopping to a list (combined with SBT) is likely to be a cost-effective means through which the UK NHS could reduce obesity and its related illnesses. The sensitivity analysis showed that the SBT+list intervention remained either dominant or cost-effective under a range of scenarios, including under an extreme worst case scenario. The results from this paper are encouraging and provide a valuable starting point for further research into the cost and benefits of obesity reduction strategies drawn from behavioural economics.
In contrast to the evidence for the shopping to a list intervention, pre-commitment via online grocery shopping and home delivery (home delivery)12 was not found to be effective with respect to weight loss, and therefore cannot be considered cost-effective on the current available evidence. Further, primary evidence would be required before home delivery can be recommended as a cost-effective means of reducing obesity and its related illnesses. The systematic review of the literature did not identify any other interventions that employed pre-commitment strategies to influence food-purchasing behaviour for overweight individuals.
The analysis focused on weight change of the trial participant and as such ignored positive spillover or ripple effects to other members of the household. Previous research has shown that weight loss of spouses of participants in a randomised weight loss trial was associated with participant weight loss and decreases in high-fat foods in the home.28 For both interventions evaluated in this present study, the pre-commitment intervention resulted in a significant change to the home food environment. Such changes may have a positive impact on other family members, especially children, for which the benefits of obesity prevention are substantial and are long term. On considering only the costs and health outcomes of the individual receiving the intervention, the benefits of the intervention in households with more than one individual have probably been underestimated.
The study population from which the treatment effect of SBT+list was obtained was restricted to overweight women in their early 40s. For the findings to be generalisable to males and other (adult) age groups, it is necessary to assume that advice to shop to a list would influence the home food environment, and therefore weight of these population groups in much the same way as demonstrated in the trial population. Assuming a generalisable treatment effect, the Markov model can be applied to males and different age groups, using age- and gender-specific values for baseline disease risks and utilities where available. Results for some of these populations were provided in the sensitivity analysis. Although the model was for a UK adult population, the results could apply to other western countries that have comparable disease patterns and prices.
There are a number of limitations to this analysis. First, there was a lack of effectiveness evidence. Only two studies met the criteria of the systematic review, and only one of these studies produced a clinically significant as well as statistically significant treatment effect. This finding is of itself worth reporting, and highlights the need for further trial evidence. The Wing et al.11 trial itself was not without limitations. It is unclear how participants were randomised and there is no mention of any attempt to conceal randomisation schedules or blind analysts to treatment group status. Despite these limitations, this trial represents the best available evidence on the effects of a pre-commitment mechanism for an overweight population. Further research in this area, particularly if focussed on longer-term interventions would be useful in improving precision of the treatment effect.
There are also limitations surrounding the model. To estimate long-term weight loss, it was assumed that the weight loss achieved from the intervention was temporary and that participants returned to their baseline weight. It was further assumed that the relative risks of chronic disease for participants in the years following weight regain were no different to that of individuals with the same, but relatively constant BMI (that is, those who did not experience a temporary weight loss). This assumption is consistent with the literature that finds an insignificant association between disease risk (or mortality) and intentional weight loss, followed by weight gain (weight cycling) after controlling for BMI.29, 30 Owing to the complex nature of the relationship between obesity and chronic diseases, it was necessary to use a simplified model of disease progression. The model did not account for the possibility of co-morbid conditions (participants could only be in one disease state at a time), and is therefore possible to underestimate the costs and utility decrements of obesity and its related diseases. The positive effects of weight loss were only modelled through reductions in BMI and consequently through known related diseases. However, it is possible for weight loss to have other impacts on wellbeing, such as improved mental health and self-esteem that may not be fully captured by health-state utility values.31 The inclusion of such effects could improve the cost-effectiveness estimates of the intervention.
The analysis adopted the perspective of the UK NHS, and therefore did not consider the costs borne by the individual or their families. The impact of the intervention on household costs would in part depend on whether the (healthier) grocery items on the intervention’s shopping list were in total more costly than the total expenditure on food (including snacks) and meals of individuals (or families) in the comparison group.
