Nature of power electronics and integration of power conversion with communication for talkative power
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-16262-0
Power electronics and communication electronics are both based on electromagnetic theory, but they are usually regarded as two distinct subfields in electrical engineering. In fact, however, electric power is the most common matter-based carrier of messages; thus, power electronics and communications can be jointly considered. Here we study the essential nature of dc-dc power converters and characterize the similarity of their operation principle to that of communication systems. Based on this similarity and the double modulation methods used in power electronics and communication, a double modulation strategy for both power and data is presented and applied in dc-dc power converters to achieve what we call ‘talkative power’. A modulation strategy called frequency hopping-differential phase shift keying (FH-DPSK) is also presented to overcome the crosstalk between chosen transmission systems. The proposed talkative power strategy sheds new light on and provides inspiration for the further development of power electronics and communication.
Power electronics and communication electronics are both based on electromagnetic theory, but they are usually addressed separately as two distinct subfields of electrical engineering. Communications are usually considered merely in the sense of the abstraction of messages from the communication medium, while the matter-based carrier of these messages, which is usually electricity1, is neglected. In communication theory, electricity itself is no longer the phenomenon of interest; rather, it is useful only as a means of transmitting information2. As Norbert Wiener said, “Information is information, not matter or energy”1,3. This opinion makes sense from some perspectives but completely ignores the connections between communications and electric power. On the other hand, communication is indispensable in a practical electrical system to achieve distributed power control for modularization, intellectualization and plug-and-play functionality; however, the communication mechanism is usually designed separately, with an independent structure4,5,6. Nevertheless, to enhance compactness and decrease costs, power line communication technology has been proposed and widely adopted7,8. The combination of power transfer and communications has also been investigated in the wireless field, where it is known as simultaneous wireless information and power transfer1. In these techniques, electrical signals are considered from the perspectives of both power and communication. However, most efforts have focussed on the methods of power and data transmission and the receiver architecture, with separate approaches for generation and coupling9,10,11.
In communication systems, there are three basic elements: transmitters, channels, and receivers. A transmitter and a receiver are located at two separate points in space, and the physical medium that connects them is called a channel. A transmitter mainly consists of a data modulator, and a receiver mainly consists of a data demodulator. Therefore, the communication process can be essentially divided into data modulation, transmission and demodulation. The base-band signal is modified to a high-frequency carrier to make it suitable for transmission. The modulated signal is then transmitted over the channel to the receiver. Finally, the receiver recreates the original signal, through a process known as demodulation.
In this paper, we reconsider power electronic converters from an interdisciplinary perspective and propose a method of integrating communication into direct current (dc)–dc converters to achieve what we call ‘talkative power’. With the proposed integration method, it becomes possible for power to ‘talk’, or communicate, during conversion. The ‘talkative power’ converter has many applications in contexts such as distributed power electronic systems, modularized dc devices, luminaires and the Internet of Things, which are dual-purposed to provide both energy and communications currently in separate ways. In addition, a novel modulation method called frequency hopping–differential phase shift keying (FH-DPSK) is proposed along with the talkative power strategy to achieve effective communication while avoiding interference between power conversion and data transmission, which will be valuable for supporting new, advanced techniques in conventional light-emitting diode (LED)/lighting technology. A fundamental and rigorous analysis is presented based on this innovative and general concept, revealing the natural relation between the two subfields of power electronics and communications and providing inspiration for their further joint development.
We have studied the essential nature of power electronic converters based on communication theory and established an analogy between the operation principles of power electronics and communications. On this basis, we have proposed a method of integrating communication into dc–dc converters to achieve what we call ‘talkative power’ in power electronic systems. This fundamental research offers a new perspective on power electronics. Combining power electronics and communications reveals the inherent links between these two subfields. The proposed talkative power strategy simplifies the communication structure in a dc–dc converter system and offers an incentive for further investigation of the relation between power electronics and communications. The proposed strategy has been adopted and experimentally verified in a wired dc–dc converter system. As the switching speeds of devices increase, more advanced data modulation methods can be employed, thereby greatly improving the communication rate.
In the first experiment, the PWM/2FSK method was adopted to achieve double power-and-data modulation based on a conventional buck/boost converter. A receiver was connected to the output power line of the buck/boost converter, as shown in Fig. 7a–d. In this experiment, the output voltage was controlled, and a PI voltage compensator was used. The parameters of the conventional buck/boost converter are listed in Table 1. Now, let us analyse the principles governing switching frequency selection. The two switching frequencies used for data modulation should be phase-continuous and orthogonal; thus these two frequencies and the bit rate should satisfy Eq. (5), where vb is the baud rate:
a The general structure of the prototype. It includes a buck/boost converter as a data transmitter and a receiver sharing a common power line with the buck/boost converter. vin denotes the input voltage of the buck converter. Data are transmitted from the buck/boost converter to the receiver via the dc power line. b Detailed circuit of the buck/boost converter, in which vin denotes the input voltage, Cin denotes the input capacitor while Cout denote the output capacitor. L denotes the inductor and Zload denotes the load. The modulated signal is the gate signal for MOSFET S1, and its complementary signal is the gate signal for MOSFET S2. c The structure of the receiver. It consists of load ZR, a signal conditioning circuit and a DSP with analogue-to-digital converter (ADC) to output digital data. d The signal conditioning circuit in the receiver. This circuit is composed of a dc blocking capacitor, a differential amplifier, an active second-order high-pass filter, an active second-order LPF and a dc voltage bias circuit. R1–R13 denote resistors, and C1–C5 denote capacitors. vripple denotes the conditioned signal voltage. The input signal, which has various frequency components and a large dc bias, is conditioned, and at the output port, a signal with a single frequency (a sinusoidal wave) and a proper dc bias is achieved.
A larger k leads to a lower baud rate but better noise rejection. The switching frequencies in a dc–dc converter are restricted by the hardware parameters, the performance of the controller and the design requirements. Here we chose 100 and \(83.\dot 3\,{\mathrm{kHz}}\) (with periods of 10 and 12 μs, respectively) as the switching frequencies f1 and f0. Since the power line was multiplexed as a communication channel and thus was noisy and uneven, we conservatively selected a constant of k = 6; thus the baud rate was 2.78 kB (with a period of 240 μs), which is fast enough for the transmission of state and control information. These switching frequencies and baud rate are not unique; there are other options. We adopted a TI TMS320F28035 digital signal processor (DSP) as the controller for both the buck/boost converter and the receiver.
The receiver parameters are listed in Table 2. A signal conditioning circuit extracts the switching frequency component, which is superimposed with high-order harmonics of the switching frequency and noise in the power line. This circuit consists of a dc blocking capacitor, a differential amplifier, an active second-order high-pass filter, an active second-order LPF and a dc voltage bias circuit, as shown in Fig. 7d. Only the switching frequency component remains in the output after the DFT demodulation performed in the DSP.
The general DFT algorithm is expressed as follows:
Under the assumption that the current DFT value is based on a sequence {x(0), x(1),…x(N−1)} and the next is based on a sequence {x(1), x(2),…x(N)}, an iterative method can be employed to implement a sliding DFT; then the new DFT value after the next sample is:
Equation (7) decreases the DFT calculation time significantly, making it suitable for implementation on most micro-processors, such as a DSP or a field programmable gate array (FPGA) processor27.
In any application, a communication protocol above the physical layer is indispensable; therefore, a simple data link protocol was incorporated into the experiment. The data frame structure was defined as follows: 1 start bit, 13 data bits (from low to high), 1 odd parity bit, and 1 end bit. In the idle state, the switching frequency was 100 kHz. The output current of the buck/boost converter was packed into frames and sent to the receiver. The experimental results shown in Fig. 8 indicate that the output current (2.15 A, oscilloscope measurement) of the buck/boost converter was correctly sent and received.
The data frame structure is as follows: 1 start bit, 13 data bits (from low to high), 1 odd parity bit, and 1 end bit. The sent and received data value is 2.15. The bottom blue trace shows the output current of the buck/boost converter, measured as 2.15 A on an oscilloscope.
In the LED lighting system, a photodetector was adopted as the light receiver to extract the signal sent via light, as shown in Fig. 9a–d, and the signal conditioning circuit in the receiver and light receiver are shown in Fig. 9e. The signal conditioning circuit extracts the switching frequency component, which is superimposed with high-order harmonics of the switching frequency and noise in the power line/visible light channel. This circuit consists of a dc blocking capacitor, a differential amplifier, an active second-order band-pass filter and a dc voltage bias circuit. Only the fundamental component of the switching ripples remains in the output after the DFT demodulation performed in the FPGA. The experimental parameters are listed in Tables 3 and 4. In this experiment, the switching frequency was 1 MHz in the converter, and the communication rate of 200 kbps was much higher than that in the first experiment to achieve better talkative power performance.
In this experiment, PWM/FH-4DPSK modulation are employed. a The general structure of the experimental prototype, which includes a buck/boost converter as a data transmitter, a receiver sharing a common power line with the buck/boost converter and a light receiver. vin denotes the input voltage of the buck converter. Data are transmitted from the buck/boost converter to the receiver via the dc power line and to the light receiver via the visible LED light. b Detailed buck/boost converter circuit, in which vin denotes input voltage, Cin and Cout denote input and output capacitors respectively, and L denotes the inductor. The PWM/FH-4DPSK modulated signal is employed as the gate signal for MOSFET S1, and its complementary signal is the gate signal for MOSFET S2. c The structure of the receiver. It consists of an impedance ZR, a signal conditioning circuit and an FPGA with ADC to output digital data. d The structure of the light receiver, which consists of a photodetector, a signal conditioning circuit and an FPGA. e The signal conditioning circuit used in both the receiver and the light receiver. This circuit is composed of a dc blocking capacitor, a differential amplifier, an active second-order band-pass filter and a dc voltage bias circuit. The input signal is conditioned, and at the output port, the fundamental component of the switching ripple with a proper dc bias is obtained, denoted by vripple.
