Automated tracking to measure behavioural changes in pigs for health and welfare monitoring
Since animals express their internal state through behaviour, changes in said behaviour may be used to detect early signs of problems, such as in animal health. Continuous observation of livestock by farm staff is impractical in a commercial setting to the degree required to detect behavioural changes relevant for early intervention. An automated monitoring system is developed; it automatically tracks pig movement with depth video cameras, and automatically measures standing, feeding, drinking, and locomotor activities from 3D trajectories. Predictions of standing, feeding, and drinking were validated, but not locomotor activities. An artificial, disruptive challenge; i.e., introduction of a novel object, is used to cause reproducible behavioural changes to enable development of a system to detect the changes automatically. Validation of the automated monitoring system with the controlled challenge study provides a reproducible framework for further development of robust early warning systems for pigs. The automated system is practical in commercial settings because it provides continuous monitoring of multiple behaviours, with metrics of behaviours that may be considered more intuitive and have diagnostic validity. The method has the potential to transform how livestock are monitored, directly impact their health and welfare, and address issues in livestock farming, such as antimicrobial use.
Monitoring behavioural changes in animals, including livestock, offers insights into the change of animal state. Such changes may be caused by health and welfare challenges, or changes in their environment1. Behaviour is an aid for identifying problems2 and changes can be revealed by direct observation of animals by their keepers during routine daily checks; for example, inability to stand, unresponsiveness to stimuli, or gross change in 24-hour feed consumption3. However, observation is impractical given the move towards large livestock settings that can house thousands of animals, to meet increasing global demand for food4. With substantially larger animal-to-staff ratios, the short periods of time for observation of each individual only permit detection of substantial changes in severely compromised animals, which may be too late for effective intervention. Observation of subtle changes that precede gross changes and clinical signs enables early detection5 and allows timely corrective action to be taken. For example, tail biting in pigs is a major compromise to their welfare, which affects production6, and increased restlessness can signal an outbreak up to six days in advance7, which on a commercial scale would be impossible to detect in the relatively short time for observations during daily checks.
Sensor-based automation methods to monitor animal behaviour longitudinally can overcome these challenges1,8. Monitoring with colour video cameras has identified changes in specific behaviours in groups of livestock by measuring optical flow patterns in commercial chicken houses9,10, or activity indexes in groups of pigs11 and chickens12. However, an animal may not respond to such challenges through change in a single behaviour1, so leveraging the full potential of video cameras to measure behaviours with known diagnostic validity is required for monitoring health and welfare challenges. 3D video cameras enable automated tracking and monitoring of animals capable of moving within their 3D environments, such as aquaculture13 and flying invertebrate14. Although pig movement occurs on the ground plane, 3D tracking enables measurement of standing behaviour, which is relevant to multiple health and welfare compromises. The practical use of depth sensors for automated monitoring is currently limited by manual calibration of starting positions for 3D tracking of pigs15,16 or thresholds for measuring standing from depth measurements17,18.
The objective was to develop an automated system with a single type of sensor–a depth video camera–to track 3D pig positions and measure multiple behaviours non-invasively that specifically have diagnostic validity. Standing behaviour is automatically modelled from the sensor’s depth measurements and a method is developed for measuring feeding for group-housed animals. A controlled challenge study introduced a novel object into pens to validate the automated system against ground truth data. The behavioural changes were representative of real health and welfare challenges in a commercial setting with large numbers of animals. Group-level changes, such as the standing and feeding durations, and spatial distribution; i.e., use of specific areas of the pen, were expected to be affected by this challenge in a predictable manner. Our long-term aim is the development of an automated system to monitor pig groups on commercial farms. This will lead to a new paradigm of raising livestock and transform the management of health and welfare challenges that arise.
Comparisons of manual observations of behaviour were performed between days in which a novel object (newspaper) was provided (treatment) and time-matched control days (control), and also between times of the same day within group. Data produced are mean scores of behaviour duration, per 5-minute interval, with control and treatment days alternating between pens on two consecutive days for the 4 pens (n = 4 per control and treatment).
Before provision of the novel object (11:00–12:00, all times denoted as hh:mm), there were no differences in pig behaviour between the control and treatment days, with similar durations of standing, feeding, drinking, and making non-nutritive visits (NNVs), which are defined as a pig entering the feeding area (see Materials and Methods; Fig. 7a) without consuming feed (Table 1).
During provision of the novel object (12:00–13:00), differences in the behaviour of the pigs on the control and treatment days were observed. On the treatment day, pigs became highly engaged with the novel object immediately following provision. During provision, standing duration was higher in comparison to the control day, as shown in the area under the curve (AUC) analysis of differences in behaviour (Fig. 1; AUCtreatment 255,020.40, AUCcontrol 80,416.30). On a control day, a human entered the pig building in the same manner as on a treatment day, but did not provide a novel object to the designated pens (See Materials and Methods). This caused the pigs to stand and then revert to prior baseline levels of standing within 20 minutes. Conversely, on the treatment day, the increased standing was sustained while the novel object was present. An increase in NNVs duration was observed during provision in comparison to the control day (Fig. 2; AUCtreatment 15,004.50, AUCcontrol 4,027.80). During provision, the feeding duration initially increased following a human entering the pig building on the control day. However, feeding duration remained similar to pre provision on the treatment day. The novel object was gradually destroyed by the pigs, and small amounts remained by 12:35. From 12:35 onwards, an increase in feeding duration was observed on the treatment day that returned to levels similar to the control day (Fig. 3; AUCtreatment 25,192.00, AUCcontrol 29,226.00). No differences were observed in drinking duration between control and treatment days (AUCtreatment 4,964.33, AUCcontrol 4,352.06).
Observed standing duration (s, ± SEM) for control day, without intervention, and treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object.
Observed non-nutritive visits (NNVs) duration (s, ± SEM) for control day, without intervention, and treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. An NNV was defined as a visit to the feeding area in the pen, where the pig then left the area having not consumed any food. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents: pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object.
Observed feeding duration (s, ± SEM) for control day, without intervention, and treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object.
Post provision of the novel object (13:00–14:00), an initial increase in the standing duration was observed in both control and treatment days in response to a human entering the pig building to remove any remaining novel object from the pens. Limited differences in behaviour were observed, with similar durations of standing, feeding, drinking and performing NNVs on both control and treatment days.
Data produced are means of all folds from 10-fold cross-validation (see Materials and Methods). The system tracked multiple pigs (19 pigs within the pen on the day of observation) to a precision of 0.06 (±3.0 ×10−4 SEM, n = 10) Multi-Object Tracking Precision (MOTP)19 (see Materials and Methods). The overall accuracy of the tracker’s ability to follow multiple pigs over time was 0.89 (±1.57 10−3 SEM, n = 10) mean Multi-Object Tracking Precision (MOTP)19 (see Materials and Methods), which measured 8.17% undetected pigs (false negatives), detected 2.1% non-existent pigs (false positives), and 0.33% errors arising from switching track identities between pigs when in proximity. The average length of time a pig was tracked for (track duration) was 21.88 s (±4.08 SEM, n = 10), which demonstrates the tracks are not fragmented into lots of small tracks.
A model of standing behaviour was developed from the sensor’s depth measurements of animal position. Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) were derived (see Materials and Methods) leading to two distinct model components that discriminated standing from not standing (e.g., lying and sitting; see Materials and Methods, Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary Table S1). Models were derived for each day to account for change in animal size and for each pen to account for inter-group variation. Automated measurement of standing (Fig. 4) was positively correlated to ground truth data (number of pigs standing counted per frame) from the behaviour observations (Fig. 1) with \({R}^{2}\) (mean \(\pm \) SEM, number of pens): control 0.94 \(\pm \) 0.02, n = 4; treatment 0.97 \(\pm \) 0.01, n = 4. The mean root-mean-square error (RMSE) was 128.71 s (n = 4, [1.93, 2483.68]) for control and 102.60 s (n = 4, [72.64, 2603.143]) for treatment.
Automated and observed measurements of standing duration (s, ± SEM) for (a) treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00, and (b) control day, without intervention. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object.
The GMM for pen 4 on the treatment day (Supplementary Figure S1, top right figure) showed components with similar heights for standing and not standing. There was a small reduction in frames between 11:00–12:00 and 13:00–14:00 due to technical issues. The pigs were less active (longer duration of not standing) outside of the novel object provision between 11:00–12:00 and 13:00–14:00, and this is evident in the GMM with fewer \(Z\) measurements around 1.85 m (lower red peak for not standing). The reduction in frames does not affect measurement of behaviours; for example, a pig still travels 1 m or feeds for 1 s across 5 depth frames if the middle frame is dropped.
Automated measurement of feeding (Fig. 5) was positively correlated to ground truth data from the behaviour observations (Fig. 3) with \({R}^{2}\) (mean \(\pm \) SEM, number of pens): control 0.86 ± 0.01, n = 4; treatment 0.49 ± 0.10, n = 4. The mean RMSE was 69.08 s (n = 4, [0, 576.61]) for control and 121.16 s (n = 4, [86.61, 576.21]) for treatment.
Automated and observed measurements of feeding duration (s, ± SEM) for (a) treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00, and (b) control day, without intervention. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object.
Automated measurement of drinking had no correlation with ground truth data from the behaviour observations with R
2 (mean ± SEM, number of pens): control -0.51 ± 0.28, n = 4; treatment -0.08 ± 0.06, n = 4. The mean RMSE was 44.92 s (n = 4, [0, 77.07]) for control and 38.76 s (n = 4, [0.47, 91.29]) for treatment.
For locomotor activities, increased speed and distance was observed in both control and treatment days as a result of a human entering the pig building to provide the novel object to designated pens at 12:00. Locomotor activities on the control day subsided while activities on the treatment day were sustained by the novel object (Fig. 6). No differences were observed in spatial entropy between control and treatment days, which suggests pig use of space was unaffected by the novel object.
Automated measurement of locomotor activities for control day, without intervention, and treatment day, where the novel object was introduced to the pen at 12:00. Each data point is the mean per 5-minute interval of 4 pens of pigs unless stated otherwise in Materials and Methods. Any remaining novel object was removed at 13:00. Data plotted represents pre (11:00–12:00), during (12:00–13:00, grey background), and post (13:00–14:00) provision of the novel object. (a) Speed (m/s on ground plane, ± SEM). (b) Distance travelled (m on ground plane, ± SEM).
The need for continuous monitoring of animals in commercial settings is becoming increasingly important for mitigating risks in human food production, such as reductions in livestock performance and deterioration in their health and welfare20. Continuous monitoring of behaviour enables early identification of subtle changes that would otherwise be impossible for a human observer with intermittent monitoring on a commercial scale. The potential impact of early corrective action stands to improve the effectiveness of treatment, enhance animal welfare21, support profitable and sustainable production systems22, and may even have an impact on antimicrobial inputs23. A practical automated monitoring system was developed with a single type of sensor specifically for measuring multiple behaviours that change and have diagnostic validity. A controlled behaviour study validated a short-term change in group-level behaviour through the provision of a novel object, in a manner representative of a real-world scenario. Together, the automated system and controlled study provide a framework for developing understanding into changes in animal behaviour and early warning systems.
Evaluation of automated tracking against ground truth annotations demonstrated good performance in detecting individual animals and tracking over consecutive frames. The average length of time a pig was tracked for (track duration) was lower compared to a study that tracked group-housed pigs using a colour video camera evaluated on three pigs in a pen with more unoccupied space24. Detecting individual animals using 3D shape is beneficial for animals housed with commercial stocking density, which is a challenge of tracking multiple animals in proximity25. Tracking pigs with video provides more accurate position measurements than current RFID-based localisation methods26. The method for measuring standing from the depth camera is data-driven and does not require calibration, such as setting depth thresholds17,18. The method automatically learns models using depth data to label the measurements as standing or not, and improves upon quantifying the vertical activity from depth measurements by automatically labelling the data as standing27. For this study, standing is modelled for each day; however, in a production system, the frequency of retraining is expected to be less, and the models could be adapted rather than retrained.
Behavioural observations pre, during, and post provision of the novel object confirmed changes in durations of feeding, NNVs, and standing. Validation of the automated system’s ability to measure behaviour compared to manual observations demonstrated the suitability of these behaviours for monitoring changes. The method for measuring feeding is suitable for commercial settings because feeding is registered only when an animal is standing in front of the feeder, which overcomes limitations of pigs lying in this area without feeding28 and only using spatio-temporal clustering with fewer animals29. However, this method and RFID approaches28 do not filter pigs standing at the feeder and not feeding. In addition, the method may be more suitable in large-scale settings, where automated feeders that register the feeding behaviour of animals may be impractical or too expensive. Pigs spend a lot of time resting, so standing is an important measurement of activity. Automated measurement of animals with a different pattern of resting behaviour may not require measuring standing; for example, mice activity may be assessed from only speed of movement and turning angle29. Locomotor measurement is independent of animal growth because it uses the centroid of a pig, whereas methods based on the number of pixels include pig size in either activity measurement11 or spatial distribution27. Sensors attached to pigs, such as accelerometers, can measure standing behaviour30, but video cameras can be more practical.
The duration of feeding, standing and measurement of locomotor activities were relevant in this study because of the general diagnostic validity for multiple health and welfare challenges where behavioural intensity may increase or decrease. For example, infectious diseases associated with reduced feeding behaviour from pneumonia outbreaks31, reduced standing behaviour from Salmonella infections32, and reduced locomotion from parasitic infection33. NNVs demonstrated potential as a general diagnostic from the changes observed. NNVs are thought to be carried out by animals to facilitate or update their knowledge of food resources34. Reduced NNVs have been shown in calves with respiratory disease35 and mouse models of Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s disease36,37,38. In addition, identification of increased NNVs could also benefit monitoring; for example, in commercial settings, NNVs will increase with restlessness as observed here, and may be the case in tail-biting outbreaks. Automated measurement of NNVs is a limitation of the system, because the stay point method does not capture the context of what the pig is doing while staying in the area; i.e., it only detects a pig staying in that area and not that it hasn’t fed and left the area. A human provides accurate annotations of NNV from high resolution videos, but the automated method relies on lower resolution data from the pre-processed point clouds.
The protocol for the challenge study required humans to enter the pig building to retrieve any remains of the novel object after the one-hour period of its provision. These short, time periods were removed from the analysis because humans blocked the camera’s view of the pigs, which could be automatically removed in practice (e.g., excluding data from known observation routines), and should be considered when adding further automated analysis to the data. Also, changes in behaviour were expected as a result of a human entering the pig building to provide and retrieve remains of the novel object, which causes disruption in all pens (both control and treatment). This was observed as increased feeding duration on the control day, which was caused by the disturbance from resting, prompting the decision to feed after a period of rest. In the same manner, after a period of activity with the novel object on the treatment day, the pigs switched attention to feeding after the novel object was destroyed.
Whilst the system provides monitoring of behaviours to enable early corrective intervention, it also has some limitations. The low correlation of drinking behaviour measurements with observations may be caused by the nipple drinkers being very small and the high accuracy with which annotations were made. From an automated perspective, drinking was sometimes recorded when the pigs head was in close proximity to the drinkers, rather than specifically the mouth. Automated measurement of feeding does not distinguish visits that are feeding from visits that are not feeding. A non-feeding visit was defined as NNVs in the manual behavioural observations. Correlation of feeding behaviour measurements with observations were lower on the treatment day, which may be caused by increased activity in the feeding area when pigs are stationary and distracted from feeding by interacting with the novel object. Also, there were instances where the novel object was nudged into the feeder (for example, Supplementary Figure S2). More generally, the correlation of feeding may be lower compared to laboratory studies29, because higher stocking density in commercial settings causes pigs to stand next to the feeder when not feeding, which also occurs when measuring feeding with RFID in groups of pigs28.
In this study, behaviours are measured at the group level. However, measuring individuals is beneficial for confining detection of specific changes; e.g., one pig starts to feed less, and this is possible with RFID-based feeding systems28. There is a trade-off in sensor choice between the range of different behaviours that can be measured and measuring the behaviours of individuals or groups1.
The automated method’s practical nature in a commercial setting is significant for the following reasons. Automation is the key practical benefit that enables: continuous monitoring of large numbers of animals supported by human observation, objectivity by removing inter- and intra-observer variability, and identification of subtle behavioural changes that are not possible for a human to detect at the pen side. The method inferred multiple behaviour types from animal tracks (feeding, standing, and locomotor activities), and this multi-behaviour approach is more common for behavioural assays13,15,39,40,41,42. However, the tendency in livestock applications has been to focus on one specific behaviour at a time, such as social behaviour15, feeding and drinking43, aggression18,44, and locomotor activity45. Monitoring a single behaviour may be a risk for detection of health and welfare of groups, considering the variability from an individual animal’s response to a challenge and the environment. The system reports behaviours with metrics that may be considered more intuitive and unambiguous (i.e., time, distance, and speed) than those for current livestock monitoring based on abstract metrics, such as activity indexes and optical flow measures9,11,46,47.
The automated method supports the development of early warning systems. Recent progress focuses on monitoring behaviour where the responsibility of detecting problems falls upon users of the system1. Developments towards systems that automatically alert staff to behavioural changes are limited to threshold methods, which may be arbitrary, or focus on single behaviours48,49. Early warning systems should be robust to biological variation in individuals, the dynamics of different pens and groups, behavioural changes arising from natural growth, and ultimately false alarms that may otherwise require further analysis for alarm reduction and prioritisation50. To support these developments, behaviours are reported with diagnostic validity from a reproducible framework comprising a controlled behaviour study and automated behaviour monitoring system that is practical and relevant to commercial livestock. There is broader significance for the one-health concept where human, animal and environment health are all linked51.
