Two sides of the same coin? An investigation of the effects of frames on tax compliance and charitable giving
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-019-0247-4
Despite tax compliance being mandatory and charitable giving being voluntary, both can be seen as two sides of the same coin. Paying taxes and making monetary donations are two complementary ways to financially provide for the common good. Using goal-framing theory, an experimental study with a mixed-factorial design (N = 435) was conducted to test the effects of different frames on the intention to pay taxes and make charitable donations. Our results showed that for real taxpayers (i.e., for employees, self-employed, and entrepreneurs, but not for students) using a gain goal frame as a support to the normative goal frame was only effective in increasing intended tax compliance, whereas a supporting hedonic goal frame was only effective in increasing donation intention. In addition, it was found that gain and hedonic goal frames worked differently according to the prevailing motivation behind tax compliance and charitable giving. When the intrinsic motivation was already high, frames were ineffective (in the tax context) or even counter-productive (in the charitable giving context). In the presence of extrinsic motivations, instead, frames are especially effective.
Effective provision of services and public utilities is a key element of quality of life for most societies. Such provision can result from both paying taxes and making charitable donations, which are two mechanisms that can benefit society and enhance the overall welfare. Hence, most governments and institutions need to find a way to overcome the free-riding problem inherent in the financial provision of common goods and promote both tax compliance and charitable giving.
The economic literature seems to agree that taxes and donations are two different ways – one ‘public’, the other ‘private’ – of creating public value and increase the overall social welfare (Slavov, 2014; Sugden, 1984). Most countries depend on tax compliance to provide essential services, such as healthcare, education, and safety; whereas charitable giving plays a significant role in alleviating problems related to the crisis of the welfare state (Selle, 1993). Arguably, societies in which people do engage in these behaviours are better off than those in which people do not. Hence, any free-riding behaviour is a significant concern, as it means that governments, institutions, and NGOs are denied the revenues needed to provide services that are essential for ensuring the safety, health, and wellbeing of all citizens. The conjoint study of tax compliance and charitable giving may seem paradoxical, given their different nature. However, despite their intrinsic difference of being mandatory (tax compliance) or voluntary (charitable giving), they belong together, as any imperfectly enforced tax system involves an element of voluntary giving (Dwenger et al., 2016). This complementarity is in regard to the societal impact of tax payments and donations, and does not necessarily reflect how individuals view these mechanisms (i.e., at psychological level).
From a psychological perspective, there is a dearth of studies investigating if tax compliance and charitable giving are perceived as complementary forms of financial provision for the common good. Although both situations can be described as social dilemmas, as they involve a tension between what is best for the individual and what is best for the society as a whole (Dawes, 1980), no evidence in psychological literature can be found regarding the psychological equivalence from a layperson’s perspective between paying taxes and making donations. An exception is a qualitative study (Castiglioni et al., 2018) which investigated lay people representations on the common good and its financial provision. It is suggested that, at least at formal and cognitive level, both paying taxing and making donations are perceived as indirect monetary ways to provide for the common good (the former as part of people’s civic duty, the latter as a possible form of offering beneficence besides volunteering) whose effectiveness is subsidiary to the management and use of a third party (e.g., governments, NGOs, etc.). At affective level, instead, they are very different. When paying taxes, people are concerned mostly about the effects their contribution may have, and expect a material gain in return (i.e., public services); whereas when making a monetary donation, people are concerned mostly about the motivations behind the gesture, and expect an emotional gain in return (i.e., personal fulfilment and gratification). In other words, it seems that people might pursue different goals when involved in these two different forms of financial provision for the common good. Accordingly, a campaign aimed at promoting tax compliance should focus on the material outcomes citizens may obtain in return (e.g., public services). A campaign aimed at promoting charitable giving, instead, should focus on personal outcomes like fulfilment and gratification (e.g., ‘warm glow’ feelings), rather than on the material outcomes.
The above-mentioned study, however, has some limitations, as it is a preliminary exploration on the subject aimed at developing some insights rather than testing a-priori hypotheses. Thus, since the use of multiple methods to test a theory is crucial for a deeper understanding, we performed an experimental study aimed at testing whether using different goal frames increases the intention to financially provide for the common good. To test this, we refer to the goal-framing approach (Lindenberg and Steg, 2007), according to which a message is more likely to be effective if it corresponds to the recipients’ goals. If the complementarity of tax payments and charitable giving in regard to their societal impact is also perceived at psychological level and people pursue the same goal when giving their contribution, we should expect different specific frames to be equally effective in both domains. If, however, people pursue different goals when paying taxes or when making donations, we should expect frames to differ in effectiveness. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the psychological literature to compare the effectiveness of different frames on both paying taxes and making donations. Such comparison could help to shed some light on and develop new insights in both tax compliance and charitable giving research.
Next section will present rationale and hypotheses of the study, with a focus on the framing effects literature. Next, methodological details will be provided, including design, participants, procedure, and measures. Finally, the main results will be reported and discussed.
Before testing the research hypotheses, some exploratory analyses were performed. These revealed an interaction effect between framing condition and employment on intention to pay taxes (framing condition × employment, F(4, 426) = 2.535, p < .05, η2 = .03), with students differing from taxpayers (i.e., employees, self-employed individuals, and entrepreneurs). This difference can be attributed to the fact that students have no direct or regular experience with tax payment. Thus, analysis of a sub-sample of taxpayers will be presented first (67.8% of total sample, n = 295). Subsequently, results on taxpayers will be compared with the results from the sub-sample of students.
A two-way mixed ANOVA was performed on the sub-sample of taxpayers to determine the effects of the framing condition (between subjects: control vs. gain frame vs. hedonic frame) and context of contribution (paying taxes vs. making donations) on the intention to make a financial contribution. Levene’s test was significant for both intended tax compliance (F(2, 292) = 6.790, p < .01) and donation intention (F(2, 292) = 4.058, p < .05), thus violating the assumption of homogeneity of variances. However, analysis of variance is reasonably robust to violations of this assumption provided that the size of groups is similar (Box, 1953; Lix et al., 1996), as is the case for this study.
A significant interaction effect between framing condition and context of contribution was found, F(2, 292) = 6.499, p < .01, η2 = .04.
Post hoc tests revealed that participants in the gain frame condition reported a higher intention to pay taxes (M = 6.86) compared to participants in either the control condition (M = 6.34) or the hedonic frame condition (M = 6.28). Whereas the donation context showed an opposite pattern, with participants in the hedonic frame condition (M = 6.08) reporting a higher intention than either participants in the control condition (M = 5.33) or the gain frame condition (M = 5.26). It should be noted that, in the tax context, the hedonic frame group was not significantly different from the control group (see Fig. 1). Similarly, in the donation context, the gain frame group did not significantly differ from the control group (see Fig. 2). Therefore, Hypothesis 1a and Hypothesis 2a were only partially supported, since only one of two different supporting goal frames (the gain goal frame for intended tax compliance and the hedonic goal frame for donation intention, respectively) is effective in increasing the intention to make a financial contribution if compared to the condition with no frame. Hypothesis 1b and Hypothesis 2b, however, were fully supported; a supporting gain goal frame had a greater impact on intention to pay taxes than a supporting hedonic goal frame, and a supporting hedonic goal frame had a greater impact on intention to make donations than a supporting gain goal frame (Hypothesis 2b).
Intention to pay taxes as a function of framing conditions. The gain frame condition is significantly different from both control group and hedonic frame condition at the .05 level
Donation intention as a function of framing conditions. The hedonic frame condition is significantly different from both control group and gain frame condition at the .05 level
This result was also in line with the different beliefs that participants reported regarding taxes and donations. Overall, participants believed that paying taxes could aid in the development of the welfare system of a country (M = 6.51, SD = 2.18) to a greater extent than donations could (M = 5.73, SD = 2.08), t(246) = 4.631, p < .001. Whereas participants reported to experience more feelings of fulfillment and personal gratification when making donations (M = 6.49, SD = 1.94) rather than when paying taxes (M = 4.79, SD = 2.34), t(242) = 9.968, p < .001.
As mentioned above, an interaction effect between employment and framing condition was found. This evidence lead to an exploratory analysis of the difference between taxpayers and students. A comparison of sub-sample of students (n = 140) with the sub-sample of taxpayers in the context of tax payment, indicated that students did not differ significantly from taxpayers either in the control condition (t(145) = 0.105, p = n.s.) or in the gain frame condition (t(146) = 0.859, p = n.s). In contrast, they did significantly differ in the hedonic frame condition (t(138) = 4.001, p < .001), with students (M = 7.63, SD = 1.20) being more affected by the emotional return than taxpayers (M = 6.28, SD = 2.25). No differences between taxpayers and students were found in the context of charitable giving. Figure 3 shows the interaction effect between employment and framing condition. Whereas for taxpayers the gain frame was the only condition that significantly differed from the others, post-hoc tests revealed that, for students, not only was the gain frame condition significantly different from that of the control group (p < . 05), but also the hedonic frame condition was statistically different (p < .001). No statistically significant differences were observed between the gain frame and the hedonic frame. In other words, both goal frames were effective in increasing students’ intention to comply with the tax system.
Interaction effect between employment and framing condition in tax payment context. For students, both gain frame and hedonic frame conditions are significantly different from the control group at the .05 and .001 level, respectively. For taxpayers, only the gain frame is significantly different from both the control group and hedonic frame at the .05 level
Hierarchical regressions were performed separately on intended tax compliance and donation intention to test interaction effects between framing conditions and intrinsic/extrinsic motivation to comply/donate. All continuous variables were mean-centered, and the categorical variable (i.e., framing conditions) was recoded into two dummy variables. Giving the observed differences between taxpayers and students, only taxpayers were included for the analysis on intended tax compliance.
Enforced tax compliance and framing conditions were entered in the first step of a hierarchical regression, and the resulting model explained 8% of the variance in intended tax compliance, F(3, 269) = 8.057, p < .001. Enforced tax compliance (β = −.26, t = 4.426, p < .001) was negatively related to intention to comply, indicating that tax compliance is lower when people score high on enforced tax compliance (extrinsic motivation). Next, the two-way interactions between framing conditions and enforced tax compliance were entered (R2ch = .01), F(5, 267) = 24.195, p < .001. Results indicate that only the Enforced tax compliance x gain frame interaction has a relationship with tax compliance (β = .15, t = 1.747, p < .10), with an effect size of f2 = .01.Footnote 4 Interestingly, this relationship—although only significant at p < .10—was positive. Inspection of the regression weights suggests that, although the main effect of enforced tax compliance on intended tax compliance is negative, a supporting gain goal frame can mitigate such negative effect, as suggested by Hypothesis 3 (see Fig. 4 and Appendix C for full regression results).
Regression weights of enforced tax compliance (i.e., extrinsic motivation) on intended tax compliance in different framing conditions
Next, voluntary tax compliance and framing conditions were entered in the first step of a hierarchical regression, and the resulting model explained 28% of the variance in intention to pay taxes, F(3, 269) = 35.529, p < .001. Voluntary tax compliance (β = .52, t = 10.036, p < .001) was positively related to intended tax compliance. Then, the two-way interactions between framing conditions and voluntary tax compliance were entered, but no significant interactions were found.
A hierarchical regression was performed on donation intention by first entering ‘Public’ dimension of prosocial tendencies (i.e., extrinsic motivation) and framing conditions. The resulting model only explained 5% of the variance in intention to make donations, F(3, 385) = 6.118, p < .001. ‘Public’ (β = −.10, t = 3.284, p < .01) was negatively related to donation intention. Next, the two-way interactions between framing conditions and Public were entered, but no significant interactions were found, thus not supporting Hypothesis 4.
Moving on to the intrinsic motivation in charitable giving context, in the first step of the hierarchical regression it was found that Altruism (β = .03, t = 0.685, p = n.s.) had no significant main effect on donation intention. Next, the two-way interactions between framing conditions and Altruism were entered (R2ch = .01), F(5, 383) = 3.770, p < .01. Results indicate that only the Altruism × hedonic frame interaction has a negative relationship with donation intention (β = −.13, t = 1.938, p = .05), with an effect size of f2 = .01. Inspection of the regression weights suggests that donation intention is lower when people score high on altruism and are paired with a hedonic frame, at least if compared with control condition and a gain frame. This result suggests that, although altruism seems to have no main effect on intention to make donations, a supporting hedonic goal frame in presence of high levels of altruism (i.e., intrinsic motivation) can be counter-productive on donation intention (see Fig. 5).
Regression weights of Altruism (i.e., intrinsic motivation) on donation intention in different framing conditions
Based on the goal-framing theory, this study aimed at testing whether making two background goal frames (i.e., gain goal frame and hedonic goal frame) more salient and compatible with the overarching normative goal frame could increase the intention to pay taxes and make charitable donations. Results showed that a supporting gain frame was only effective in increasing intended tax compliance, whereas a supporting hedonic frame was only effective in increasing donation intention.
In the context of taxation, not only goal frames were not equally effective to promote tax compliance—since a supporting gain goal frame was more effective than a supporting hedonic goal frame—but a hedonic frame was not different from no frame at all (Hypothesis 1a not fully supported; Hypothesis 1b fully supported). Interestingly, such results only applied to a sub-sample of taxpayers (i.e., employees, self-employed people, and entrepreneurs). Students were found to differ from taxpayers, as for students the hedonic frame was effective in increasing intended tax compliance as well (only for students Hypothesis 1a was fully supported). Presumably, students’ lack of tax experience can explain this difference. In particular, students may process tax-related information differently from taxpayers, being tax payment an atypical or unusual situation for them (see also Affective Infusion Model; Forgas, 1995).
This result leads to two different considerations, a theoretical and a pragmatic one. At the theoretical level, it appears that to some extent—at least at a formal level and before real tax experience is gained—paying taxes and making donations can be seen as two sides of the same coin. However, things seem to change, especially at an affective level, with the acquisition of real tax experience. At a pragmatic level, the current findings suggest that—at least in the field of tax compliance research—caution is needed when studies are solely conducted on a population of students, as results may not apply to taxpayers. Despite some studies suggest that the experimental tax behaviour of students is often—although not always—similar to the experimental behaviour of other subjects (see Alm et al., 2015) it has been also found that in tax compliance experiments students are more responsive to policy levers than non-students are (Choo et al., 2016) and respond differently to audit probability (Marriott et al., 2013).
Moving to the donation context, it was found that a supporting hedonic goal frame was more effective than a supporting gain goal frame, and a supporting gain goal frame was not different from no frame at all (Hypothesis 2a not fully supported; Hypothesis 2b fully supported). No differences between students and taxpayers were found, which can be explained by that both students and taxpayers may have similar levels of familiarity and experience with charitable giving. The current study suggests that focusing on feelings is effective in promoting donation intention. This result is in line with those studies suggesting that in the context of charitable giving a soft-sell approach, which typically appeals to the audience’s emotions, is more effective than a hard-sell approach, which typically focuses on claims about practical, functional, or utilitarian values (Okazaki et al., 2010). This result is also line with other evidence from the literature arguing that sometimes donors do not primarily care about results and fundraising efficiency (Berman and Davidson, 2003; Charles and Kim, 2016; Gordon and Khumawala, 1999). In other words, the effort—rather than the actual outcome—seems to be more valuable, leading to the idea that ‘it’s the thought that counts'. Briers et al. (2007) suggest that because donor are already ‘buying’ something immaterial (e.g., a warm glow feelings), perhaps it is not necessary to offer them an additional gain. However, in the current study, the gain frame was not presented as a personal gift or item, but rather as an overall increase in services and general welfare from which one could also personally benefit. Another possible explanation of such result comes from the distinction between altruism donors (who enjoy seeing the wellbeing of others increase), and warm-glow donors (who gain pleasure from the act of giving itself). Further considerations about this distinction will be provided below, when elaborating on the differences between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
A second aim of this study was to assess whether frames worked differently in the presence of an intrinsic/extrinsic motivation to pay taxes/make donations. In the tax context, it was found that tax compliance was lower when taxpayers scored high on enforced tax compliance (extrinsic motivation). In contrast, tax compliance was higher when taxpayers scored high on voluntary tax compliance (intrinsic motivation). Both results are in line with the ‘slippery slope’ framework and other empirical results, where enforced compliance has been found to lead to increased tax evasion whereas voluntary compliance has been found to lead to reduced tax evasion (Kastlunger et al., 2013; Wahl et al., 2010). Frames were expected to have stronger effect on intended tax compliance in presence of high levels of extrinsic motivation to pay taxes (see Hypothesis 3). Accordingly, a significant interaction effect was found between the gain frame and extrinsic motivation, thus suggesting that focusing on what one can get in return is especially effective when taxpayers are extrinsically motivated to pay taxes. In other words, although enforced compliance has a negative effect on intention to pay taxes, a gain frame can mitigate such negative effect. No interaction effect was found between frames and intrinsic motivation to comply, as high levels of voluntary tax compliance are effective by themselves at increasing intended tax compliance. This result is especially relevant for those countries with low trust and high power, where enforced tax compliance and an antagonistic fiscal climate prevail, including Italy (see Batrancea et al., 2016; Lozza and Castiglioni, 2018). In such countries, where the high level of tax evasion can also be explained—among other factors —by the tense relationships between taxpayers and tax authorities, and people pay taxes out of fear rather than out of a sense of civic duty, framing tax-related information in terms of gains in public services can nudge people towards higher levels of tax compliance.
In the charitable giving context, no interaction effect was found between frames and extrinsic motivation (see Hypothesis 4). This may be related to a measurement issue. The ‘Public’ dimension of the PTM scale (Prosocial Tendencies Measure, Carlo and Randall, 2002) does not specifically focus on charitable giving but rather focuses on a broader range of prosocial behaviour (e.g., helping others or voluntary work). The extrinsic motivation to be prosocial in public, which is mostly reputational as someone else is watching, may refer more to voluntary work and general helping than to giving money to charities. In the context of monetary donations, extrinsic motivations may mostly refer to the so-called ‘fringe benefits’ (Olson, 1965) or when an item is offered in exchange of a donation. Interestingly, an interaction effect was found between intrinsic motivation (i.e., altruism) and the hedonic frame suggesting that focusing on feelings can work for warm glow donors but can be counter-productive in the case of pure altruist donors. It appears that the hedonic frame (which is the only one that was found to have an effect on donation intention) is less effective in presence of high levels of intrinsic motivation to behave prosocially. It might be that this kind of frame makes the pure altruists aware that there is always some kind of individual return when making a donation, even if it is just at an emotional level. As several experiments have shown, extrinsic motivations can crowd out intrinsic motivations and lead people to behave less prosocially (Chao, 2017; Deci, 1971; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000; Frey and Jegen, 2001). Donation intention may also decrease because the gesture can no longer be seen as a self-signal of altruism (Bem, 1965; Bénabou and Tirole, 2006). Alternatively, according to the attention-based multiattribute choice models (Bordalo et al., 2012; Krajbich et al., 2012; McGill and Anand, 1989), if the personal return is a particularly salient attribute, this may cause the donor to underweight less salient intrinsic motives such as altruism, potentially leading to lower motivation to donate.
To summarize, it appears that baseline motivation is an important factor that determines how people respond to different frames in the mandatory and/or voluntary provision of common goods (see also Boyer et al., 2016). Interestingly, while in the tax domain high levels of intrinsic motivation had a significant main effect on intended tax compliance and no interaction effects with the frames, in the charitable giving domain intrinsic motivation had no main effect on donation intention but showed a significant and negative interaction with hedonic frame. In both contexts, it can be observed that the use of framing effects in the presence of high levels of intrinsic motivation to make a financial contribution to the common good appears to have no added value, since it has either no effect (as in the case of tax compliance) or a negative relation (as in the case of donation intention).
Some limitations of this study need to be taken into account as well. From a methodological perspective, it should be noted that self-report intentions rather than actual behaviour were used as dependent variables. In psychological literature, positive correlations were found between self-reported and actual tax-paying behaviour (Hite, 1988), and several studies used intention to comply as a proxy for actual tax-paying behaviour (e.g., see Brizi et al., 2015; Kaplanoglou et al., 2016; Kasper et al., 2015; Wahl et al., 2010). Nonetheless, evidence can also be found suggesting that taxpayers’ stated intentions to comply may not correspond to subsequent observed behaviour (Gemmell and Ratto, 2018). As for charitable giving, intention to donate is the most consistent predictor of charitable giving behaviour (e.g., Greenslade and White, 2005; Smith and McSweeney, 2007; Warburton and Terry, 2000) and can act as a suitable proxy measure for behaviour when actual behaviour is not measured (Chacòn et al., 2007). Nonetheless, future research should adopt both laboratory and field experiments to verify whether similar frame effects can be found on observable variables too. Furthermore, research should examine whether the nature of charitable contexts would moderate framing effects. While the present study considered donation intention in a general sense, both the nature of charitable issues (e.g., underprivileged groups, environmental protection, scientific research, art promotion, etc.) and the location (e.g., local, national, international aid) may strengthen or weaken the framing effectiveness. Goal frames can be further analyzed too. For example, it would be interesting to compare the effects of a positive hedonic goal frame (i.e., seeking positive emotions) and a negative hedonic goal frame (i.e., avoiding negative emotions). Finally, it should also be noted that our study was conducted in Italy; a country with a very peculiar socio-economic context (high level of shadow economy, huge public debt, political instability, low level of donations) and where tax evasion is not perceived as a serious crime (Castiglioni et al., 2014; Cullis et al., 2015). It would be interesting to compare such results with results obtained in other countries, especially those where tax compliance is higher and donations to charities are more frequent and consistent.
A final consideration concerns the effect size of the impact of frames on contribution intention (4%). This relative small effect size suggests that the financial provision for the common good is a complex matter, and many other variables can play a role in explaining a great deal of additional variance. Nonetheless, if we multiply this small effect by the amount of taxes paid by almost 41 million Italian taxpayers and the potential donated money by over 50 million Italians over 18 years old,Footnote 5 the impact on Italian public finance would be quite relevant. Thus, despite the small effect, it is worthwhile to further explore this area of research as results can have significant practical implications.
