Intake of food rich in saturated fat in relation to subclinical atherosclerosis and potential modulating effects from single genetic variants
The relationship between intake of saturated fats and subclinical atherosclerosis, as well as the possible influence of genetic variants, is poorly understood and investigated. We aimed to investigate this relationship, with a hypothesis that it would be positive, and to explore whether genetics may modulate it, using data from a European cohort including 3,407 participants aged 54–79 at high risk of cardiovascular disease. Subclinical atherosclerosis was assessed by carotid intima-media thickness (C-IMT), measured at baseline and after 30 months. Logistic regression (OR; 95% CI) was employed to assess the association between high intake of food rich in saturated fat (vs. low) and: (1) the mean and the maximum values of C-IMT in the whole carotid artery (C-IMTmean, C-IMTmax), in the bifurcation (Bif-), the common (CC-) and internal (ICA-) carotid arteries at baseline (binary, cut-point ≥ 75th), and (2) C-IMT progression (binary, cut-point > zero). For the genetic-diet interaction analyses, we considered 100,350 genetic variants. We defined interaction as departure from additivity of effects. After age- and sex-adjustment, high intake of saturated fat was associated with increased C-IMTmean (OR:1.27;1.06–1.47), CC-IMTmean (OR:1.22;1.04–1.44) and ICA-IMTmean (OR:1.26;1.07–1.48). However, in multivariate analysis results were no longer significant. No clear associations were observed between high intake of saturated fat and risk of atherosclerotic progression. There was no evidence of interactions between high intake of saturated fat and any of the genetic variants considered, after multiple testing corrections. High intake of saturated fats was not independently associated with subclinical atherosclerosis. Moreover, we did not identify any significant genetic-dietary fat interactions in relation to risk of subclinical atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis, a disease characterized by low-grade, chronic inflammation and accumulation of lipids in the arteries, is the main underlying cause of cardiovascular disease (CVD)1,2,3. The aetiology of atherosclerosis is still not completely understood but seems to involve a complex interplay of traditional CVD modifiable- and non-modifiable risk factors.

Among these traditional risk factors, diet and its content of fats may affect the development of atherosclerosis4. A diet high in saturated fat including high intake of meat, dairy products and eggs, has been suggested to increase circulating atherogenic lipoproteins and inflammatory markers5,6 and to trigger atherosclerotic development through endothelium dysfunction and plaque rupture vulnerability5. Current European and American cardiovascular guidelines recommend to reduce saturated fats and replace them with unsaturated fats7,8, based on strong evidence from experimental studies5. However, recent epidemiological studies have failed to show an increased risk of CVD in relation to a diet rich in saturated fat9,10,11,12,13,14. Studies investigating the relation between saturated fat intake and surrogate measures of atherosclerosis, mainly carotid intima-media thickness (C-IMT), have shown inconsistent results indicating either increased C-IMT15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22 or no associations23,24,25,26,27.
Several single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) related to subclinical or clinical atherosclerosis have been identified with genome-wide association studies (GWAS)28. These studies did not consider interaction effects. The findings have been confirmed by replication only recently29. Estimates of heritability of carotid atherosclerosis vary between 20 and 75%28,30,31. As suggested from twin studies, the remaining heritability may be explained by interactions between the genetic susceptibility and lifestyle/environmental factors28,32.
Studies investigating interactions between genes and dietary fats in relation to atherosclerosis are scarce33,34,35,36, and focused exclusively on interactions between candidate genes and dietary n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in relation to carotid atherosclerosis33,35,36 or progression of coronary atherosclerosis34. Interactions were found for most of the candidate genes under evaluation: arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5)33, leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H)35,36 and sterol regulatory element binding protein-1 (SREB1)34 but not for insulin-induced gene-1 (INSIG1) and SREB cleavage-activating protein  (SCAP)34. To our knowledge, no previous study carried out a genome-wide-screening for genetic variants-dietary fat interactions in relation to atherosclerosis.
In a European multicenter study of men and women, we aimed to investigate the relationship between self-reported intake of food rich in saturated fat and C-IMT. Based on the evidence from experimental studies5, we hypothesized a positive relationship. Our aim was also to explore whether genetic predisposition may modulate this association.
Baseline characteristics among the 3,407 participants of the IMPROVE by their intake of food rich in saturated fats are presented in Table 1. High intake of food rich in saturated fats was more common among the participants recruited from the northern regions including Groningen, Stockholm and Kuopio. Compared to subjects with low intake of food rich in saturated fats, those with high intake were more likely be smokers, with low education, physically inactive, hypertensive and diabetic. They also had higher mean values of BMI and CRP but were less likely to have hypercholesterolemia (Table 1). Baseline characteristics differed between men and women: men were more likely to have high intake of food rich in saturated fat and to have diabetes whereas women were more likely to have hypercholesterolemia and hypertension. Further, men consumed more alcohol than women, whereas women were less physically active and had a lower level of education than men. (Suppl Material, Table 1).
Results from the validation analyses showed significant positive correlations between self-reported high intake of food rich in saturated fat and serum concentration of the saturated stearic acid, C18:0 (r 0.13) and the n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid (r 0.09), whereas significant inverse correlations were observed with total n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (r -0.23) including C20:5 (r -0.20) and C22:6 (r -0.25). No other significant correlation was observed.
Associations between intake of food rich in saturated fat and abnormal baseline C-IMT are shown in Table 2. Sex- and age- adjusted odds of abnormal C-IMTmean, CC-IMT mean and ICA-IMTmean were higher in the group with high intake of food rich in saturated fat as compared to those with low intake. However, after adjustment for lifestyle factors, education and MDS 1–3, results were no longer significant.
No associations between intake of food rich in saturated fat and C-IMT progression were observed either in Model 1 or 2 (Table 3).
Results from the sex-stratified analyses of the association between intake of food rich in saturated fat and C-IMT, baseline and progression, also did not show any clear associations (data not shown).
Results from the gene-dietary fat interaction analyses are shown in Suppl Material Table 2. Before Bonferroni adjustment, a statistically significant (P-value < 0.05) RERI value was observed for 1,450 of the SNPs tested for interaction with high intake of saturated fat (Suppl Material Table 2). Of those results, 1,449 indicated antagonism and one indicated synergism. After Bonferroni correction, none of these results remained statistically significant (P value for RERI < 0.05 × 10–5).
In this European population at high risk of CVD but free of clinical manifestations of CVD, no significant associations were found between a diet rich in saturated fat and abnormal C-IMT, nor progression of C-IMT, after adjustments for sex, age, level of education and lifestyle factors. Moreover, we found no significant evidence of interactions between high intake of saturated fat and genetic variants in relation to carotid atherosclerosis.
Our result of no association between a diet rich in saturated fat and abnormal baseline C-IMT is in line with results of some previous epidemiological studies23,24,25,27. These studies were relatively small (n < 1100) and performed in Australian women23, Finnish men24,25 or Spanish men and women27. However, our result does not support findings of other previous studies, performed in Canada16, the U.S.17,19,22 and Korea15,20 showing associations with increased atherosclerosis. In general, in most of the previous studies, the exposure assessment was limited to the intake of specific food items rich in saturated fat—dairy products, meat or eggs15,19,20,22,23,24,25,27—which may not capture the overall intake of saturated fats. However, in the Canadian16 and U.S.17 studies, the total intake of saturated fat (g/day) in relation to C-IMT was considered. The U.S. study was performed between 1987 and 1989 and included 7,100 women and 5,900 men from the general population, with a mean age of 54; the association with increased C-IMT was found in women only17. In the Canadian study, participants (n = 620), aged 55 on average, were without CVD risk factors and the association with increased C-IMT was modest16. Interestingly, the studies which agree with our results were mainly performed in Europe, whereas those with opposite results were performed in non-European countries. The discrepancy between our results and those reported from non-European populations may perhaps be explained by different dietary patterns, methods of cooking, source of dietary fat or total amount consumed daily. Micha et al.49 showed that the amount and sources of saturated fats may vary by geographical regions with Western European countries consuming less processed meat but more vegetables and whole grain than Northern American countries49. In light of our results, it is also noteworthy to consider that our study population has been shown to have a good compliance to a Mediterranean diet in general, although with a north–south gradient50, in which the fundamental components such as whole grain and alcohol have been shown to modify the increased risk of CVD associated with high intake of dietary saturated fat51.
Our finding of no association between dietary saturated fat and C-IMT progression confirms the results reported from two interventional studies (n < 300), performed in Dutch men and women18 and Norwegian elderly men26. Similar to our study, these two investigations were carried out in participants with risk factors for CVD over an average of 30 months follow-up for atherosclerosis18,26. Considering the limited knowledge concerning the relationship between intake of saturated fat and C-IMT progression, further studies are needed to confirm this null association.
Our findings of no association between intake of saturated fats and carotid atherosclerosis do not agree with the previously suggested detrimental effects from saturated fats on cardio-metabolic risk markers and pathophysiologic pathways involved in the atherosclerotic process5. However, recent results from the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study showed that replacement of saturated fatty acids with carbohydrate or polyunsaturated fat may have a detrimental effect on blood lipids such as triglycerides and High-Density-lipoprotein (HDL)52. In addition, in the PURE study a steep reduction in the intake of saturated fat resulted in only a moderate change of Low-Density-lipoprotein (LDL)52. Moreover, in the Dietary Intervention and Vascular Study, the replacement of saturated fatty acids with PUFA had no effect on vascular function53.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have investigated interactions between genetic variation and dietary fats in relation to abnormal C-IMT using a non-hypothesis driven approach based on genetic data from genome-wide screening. Opposite to what perhaps may be expected, our results suggest that single genetic variants do not influence the impact of dietary saturated fats on atherosclerosis. A potential explanation of our null findings might however be that effects are not large enough to be detectable in our sample. Thus, the possibility of false negative results in our study should be noted.
The main limitation of the present study is the basis for assessment of dietary fat intake. Considering that a simple short self-reported questionnaire was used, misclassification of the saturated fat intake may have occurred. However, the results from our validity analyses lend some support to the assumption that the self-reported intake of saturated fat reflects the actual intake. Of course, it is still possible that such misclassification has occurred to some extent, but it is likely to be non-differential and may have biased the results towards the null. Beyond the potential misreporting, misclassification may also be induced by our analytic method, in which we created a binary variable reflecting intake of saturated fats, possibly oversimplifying the underlying dietary intake of fat. Our assessment of dietary fat intake encompassed no characterization of the saturated fat which is another limitation. Not all saturated fatty acids have been shown to have the same effect on lipoproteins involved in the atherosclerotic process54. Hence, in further studies, it would be important to consider dietary saturated fat with a specific focus on the different type of saturated fats in relation to subclinical atherosclerosis.
The presence of unmeasured confounding in this study cannot be ruled out. For instance, adjustment for carbohydrate intake was not possible due to the lack of this information in the dietary questionnaire which mainly captures fat intake, especially saturated fat.
This study was performed in participants with at least 3 traditional CVD risk factors which limits the generalizability of results to the general population. Further, the generalizability may be hampered by heterogeneity among participants in terms of intake of food rich in saturated fats and adherence to a Mediterranean diet. Moreover, study participants may have changed their diet upon being diagnosed with a metabolic condition such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia or diabetes, causing a possible decrease in their intake of saturated fats and thus a saturated fats intake classification in our study that does not reflect a long-term dietary habit. The heterogeneity of our study population may also have hampered the possibility to detect significant interactions; hence our absence of findings should be interpreted with caution.
Finally, it should be noted that C-IMT may be questioned regarding its role as a surrogate marker for subclinical atherosclerosis: it may reflect a combination of vascular aging and the atherosclerotic process55,56. However, among the available surrogate markers of subclinical atherosclerosis, C-IMT is one of the most widely used and recognized57,58,59,60,61. Further, the uncertainty surrounding the C-IMT measure should be weighed against the benefit obtained, from a pathophysiological research perspective, of studying subclinical atherosclerosis instead of manifest CVD, as the latter outcome may have a larger width of underlying pathophysiological causal mechanisms.
