Microstructures amplify carotenoid plumage signals in tanagers
Brilliantly-colored birds are a model system for research into evolution and sexual selection. Red, orange, and yellow carotenoid-colored plumages have been considered honest signals of condition; however, sex differences in feather pigments and microstructures are not well understood. Here, we show that microstructures, rather than carotenoid pigments, seem to be a major driver of male–female color differences in the social, sexually-dimorphic tanager genus Ramphocelus. We comprehensively quantified feather (i) color (using spectrophotometry), (ii) pigments (using liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS)), and (iii) microstructures (using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) optical modeling). Males have significantly more saturated color patches than females. However, our exploratory analysis of pigments suggested that males and females have concordant carotenoid pigment profiles across all species (MCMCglmm model, female:male ratio = 0.95). Male, but not female, feathers have elaborate microstructures which amplify color appearance. Oblong, expanded feather barbs in males enhance color saturation (for the same amount of pigment) by increasing the transmission of optical power through the feather. Dihedral barbules (vertically-angled, strap-shaped barbules) in males reduce total reflectance to generate “super black” and “velvet red” plumage. Melanin in females explains some, but not all, of the male–female plumage differences. Our results suggest that a widely cited index of honesty, carotenoid pigments, cannot fully explain male appearance. We propose that males are selected to evolve amplifiers—in this case, microstructures that enhance appearance—that are not necessarily themselves linked to quality.
Why are so many birds colorful? To investigate this evolutionary “why,” we study both the physical mechanisms of color (pigments and structures) and the evolutionary mechanisms which favor colorful signals over time (selective forces). If we can fully understand the physical basis of traits, we may gain insights into their evolutionary history.
Three overlapping selective pressures shape the evolution of colorful mating displays. First, coloration may facilitate species identification, essential to avoid sterile hybrids and wasted mating efforts1. Second, colorful ornaments may reflect aesthetic preferences in the choosing sex2, perhaps shaped by a Fisherian runaway process3 or by selection on another domain such as foraging—termed “sensory bias”4. Third, and most commonly researched, color may indicate individual quality (“honest signaling theory”), either as (i) an index of health5,6,7,8,9 or (ii) as a costly signal (e.g., due to parasite load10, general handicap11, or social costs12,13,14,15,16,17,18).
Honest signaling theory is the most prominent explanation for colorful bird plumages, and red, orange, and yellow carotenoid-colored birds are a “textbook example of an honest signal”6. Carotenoids must be eaten by vertebrates rather than synthesized and may be scarce in nature. Carotenoids are correlated with some (but not all) individual quality measures5,6,19, and may be an index of proper metabolic function rather than a costly signal20 (see research on finches Taeniopygia guttata7, crossbills Loxia curvirostra8, and house finches Haemorhous mexicanus21).
Carotenoid-colored birds are used widely to research sexual selection and honest signaling, but the full physical basis of color in males compared to females is not yet understood (i.e., pigmentary and structural differences). It is useful to note that nanostructures and pigments are generally well understood in bird coloration22, but microstructures are less well studied. Microstructures are barb or barbule features greater than one micrometer (µm) but less than one millimeter (mm) in size23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31; in contrast, nanostructures32,33,34,35 such as ordered melanosomes are less than 1 µm in size (ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers (nm)). See diagram in Fig. 8 for a schematic overview of how pigments, nanostructures, and microstructures contribute to feather color. Several studies show that microstructures are important in bird color; microstructures (i) make carotenoid-based colors glossy or matte26, (ii) create green mirrors in the African Emerald Cuckoo Chrysococcyx cupreus25, (iii) enhance melanin to generate super black appearance in 15 families of birds28,29, (iv) differ between male and female fairy wrens Malurus spp.24, (v) cause angle-dependent colors due to boomerang-shaped barbs in bird-of-paradise Parotia lawesii31, (vi) impact whether reflectance is directional of diffuse30, (vii) cause gloss in cassowaries Casuarius casuarius due to a thick rachis23, (viii) vary alongside black and brown melanin-based color in Corvidae27, and more. Outside of birds, many organisms use microstructures to enhance the impact of pigments: flowers use conical epidermal cells to make richer petal colors36,37,38,39 and microstructures contribute to super black color in peacock spiders40, stick insects41, and snakes42. To what extent may microstructures, rather than pigments, explain color differences between carotenoid-colored male and female birds? The answer may help us determine which selective forces favor colorful ornaments.
Here, we explore the physical basis of carotenoid color in male versus female birds, and thus draw inferences about the evolutionary selective pressures which favor colorful signals. We focus on the social, sexually dimorphic Ramphocelus tanagers, a useful clade for questions of visual signaling43,44 and mating behavior45,46,47. These tanagers have carotenoid-based coloration ranging from bright yellow to dark matte red in males, while females are relatively duller (Fig. 1). Using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) optical modeling, pigment extraction, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS), spectrophotometry, and digital light microscopy, we document the physical and chemical basis of feather color in both males and females. From these exploratory analyses, we make inferences about the dynamics of mate choice over evolutionary time. We find preliminary evidence that microstructures enhance carotenoid-based signals in males.
Male Ramphocelus tanagers (top row) have more striking carotenoid-based coloration than females (bottom row). (A) R. flammigerus icteronotus male with vivid yellow and deep black plumage. (B) R. flammigerus icteronotus female. (C) R. flammigerus male with vivid orange and deep black plumage. (D) R. flammigerus female. (E) R. bresilius male with bright red plumage. (F) R. bresilius female. (G) R. carbo male with velvet red and deep black plumage. (H) R. carbo female. All photos are credit Nick Athanas—www.antpitta.com.
Spectrophotometry revealed a wide range of yellows, oranges, and reds in males and females, adjacent to blacks (Fig. 2, complete results in Supplementary Data). Vivid, highly saturated color patches in males typically reflected almost no light for short wavelengths before sloping sharply upwards to reflect long wavelengths in the yellow-orange-red space (Fig. 2A). In contrast, females of most species had colorful patches with a relatively more gradual upward slope, a greater-than-0 reflectance over a broad range of wavelengths, and a relatively lower peak reflectance (Fig. 2A). Males from multiple species had extremely low-reflectance black plumage, with broadband flat reflectance below 0.5%, in areas adjacent to bright color patches (Fig. 2B). Females had typical black plumage reflectances, with a slight increase in reflectance at higher wavelengths (Fig. 2B).
Males had significantly more saturated color than females (phylogenetic two-sample paired t-test; p-value = 0.0072, 95% CI: [13.0, 38.1]) based on a measure of saturation, leftwards width at half maximum reflectance (Fig. 2C). That is, they had narrower peaks. Males had significantly darker black regions than females (phylogenetic two-sample paired t-test; p-value = 0.0066, 95% CI: [0.38, 1.11]), where darkness was measured as total integrated reflectance under the curve (Fig. 2D).
Many males also had unusual “velvet red” coloration, which we define as plumages red in hue that reflect < 5% of incident light and are matte (absent specular reflections, similarly to super black plumages; Supplementary Data) in a manner similar to the super black plumages in other species (Fig. 2B). One species, R. carbo, has velvet red color on its whole body.
In general, many of the colored feathers were strong directional reflectors, such that reflected light differed in quantity (percent total reflectance) from 90° incident light to 45° incident light (Supplementary Data). For example, the velvet red patches on R. carbo increased their reflectance from ~ 0–1% to roughly 5–7% when the angle of light incidence changed from 90° to 45°. This characteristic, reflecting more light at a lower angle of incidence, is a hallmark of feathers with microstructures that impact absorbance and reflection28.
Through these exploratory analyses, we identified 29 distinct molecules that matched the absorption spectra of carotenoids. These fell into 8 groups by monoisotopic molecular mass, with 1–6 different molecules in each pigment group, which we refer to as pigment families (Table S4). We mapped the relative abundances of all described molecules onto a tree for both males and females (Fig. 3A), performed ancestral state reconstructions for each pigment family (Fig. S1), and mapped all identified pigments onto a metabolic network that shows how different molecules can be modified within the body (Fig. S2).
Five of the molecules matched our purchased pigment standards and could be conclusively identified. For the remaining pigments, the molecule’s identity was inferred based on accurate mass, retention time, MS/MS spectra, and pigments commonly found in bird feathers as described in the literature. For example, it is difficult to distinguish between the two dietary carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin. Using the metabolic networks presented in Morrison and Badyaev74 and LaFountain et al.75, we identify the molecules with the accurate mass 568.43 as zeaxanthin because none of the common avian derivates from lutein were found in any of our samples, while many derivates of zeaxanthin (and related metabolites) were found. If some or all of the detected molecules with this mass were lutein, it would not change the conclusions herein, because both are dietary pigments.
We found that dietary pigments zeaxanthin, β-cryptoxanthin, and apo-8-carotenal were found primarily in the rumped tanager clade (Fig. 3A, blue stars in Fig. S2) while the whole-body tanagers and R. sanguinolentis had primarily metabolized carotenoids. The “rumped” tanager clade had less metabolized pigments than the “whole-body” clade and R. sanguinolentis (Fig. 3A). This was affirmed through ancestral state reconstructions (Fig. S1). These mappings also showed qualitative concordance between male and female pigment profiles within a species, and qualitative concordance between pigment profiles of different regions within a bird (Fig. 3).
To assess the relationship between male and female carotenoid pigments, we conducted exploratory MCMCglmm analyses (but see Limitations). Female carotenoid pigment scores were correlated significantly with male for MCMCglmm models including all pigment isomers (Fig. 3A-C) and including summed pigment signals within a family (Fig. S4); (MCMCglmm model included pigment family and phylogeny as random effects; main model: for fixed effect male pigment as a predictor of female pigment, posterior mean = 0.55, 95% CI = [0.4434, 0.67], Neffective = 1800, p < 0.001, DIC = 1578.2; summed isomers model (Fig. S4): posterior mean = 0.74, 95% CI = [0.52, 0.96], Neffective = 1800, p < 0.001, DIC = 377.9). Models were insensitive to prior parameterization, autocorrelation was near < 0.1 for all67, and model results also did not change when we excluded pigment family as a random effect (suggesting pigment family is not exerting a strong influence). When we ran the model with summed pigment isomers, the DIC was significantly lower (DIC = 337.9 vs 1578.2), but those values cannot be directly quantitatively compared. For both all-isomer and summed-isomer models, the DIC improved significantly when we excluded apo-8-carotenal from the model, likely because this pigment was present only in male R. passerinii. Phylogenetic signal (calculated as lambda) was 0.039, suggesting a very low influence of phylogenetic structure on the data. When we predicted female:male pigment ratios using our top four models (Fig. 3D), we found a mean value of 0.95. This suggests that male and female pigment profiles are highly similar. The plots of the raw data (Fig. 3A-C; Fig. S4 for summed data plots) qualitatively support our quantitative conclusions based on MCMCglmm models: male and female tanagers have concordant pigment profiles. However, it is critical to note that we measured signal intensity—not pigment amount, directly—and therefore these results should be treated as exploratory findings across species (rather than precise findings within species).
As a simple sensitivity test, we performed a phylogenetic paired t test to investigate male versus female values for each pigment separately; we found no significant differences between males and females, supporting the results in the MCMCglmm.
In some cases, male and female birds differed perceptibly in not only saturation but also brightness and hue, which (unlike most changes in saturation) could be explained by melanin76. We found indirect evidence of melanin in regions from 8 females and 2 males (Fig. S5A; by analyzing reflectance curves) and direct microscopy evidence of melanin in five of six colorful females and one of six colorful males (Fig. S5B-G). Taken together, these exploratory results suggest that melanin pigments play a role in any unexplained differences in brightness or hue between male and female feathers.
Female Ramphocelus tanager feathers were mostly of standard microstructural appearance29. That is, feather microstructure usually looks the same as feather macrostructure, with simple cylindrical barbules extending from the central cylindrical barb, all in a single plane (Fig. 4A, Table 1, Table S3). The only female to exhibit broad variation was R. sanguinolentis (Table 1, Fig. S8, Table S3). Female R. sanguinolentis in fact had microstructural characteristics more typical of male feathers: angled, strap-shaped barbules, and an oblong expanded barb.
Males, but not females, have diverse and elaborate feather microstructure. (A) Female R. carbo red chest feather with typical simple morphology. (B) Male R. passerinii bright orange rump feather with expanded barb and strap-shaped barbules. (C) Male R. carbo velvet red back feather with dihedral barbules. (D) Male R. dimidiatus shiny red rump feather with expanded, oblong barb and strap-shaped barbules. Scale bars in left column are 200 µm; scale bars in right column (B,D,F,H) are 50 µm. Artwork in inset silhouettes credit Gabriel Ugueto; female silhouette in A is modified by Allison Shultz from original art by Gabriel Ugueto. E. Schematic illustrations of idealized cross-sections of each feather type in A-D. (F) PCA of log-transformed centered microstructural measurements for all patches from all males and all females, showing that males separate from females. Male and female microstructures are not correlated (PGLS with microstructure PC1 scores: coefficient = -0.023, SE = 0.17, p = 0.90). This PCA does not consider differences in three-dimensional structure, including dihedral barbule morphology; see Table 1.
In contrast, male Ramphocelus tanagers exhibited wide variation in feather microstructure (Fig. 4, Table 1, Table S3, Fig. S8), including widely expanded barbs, oblong barbs, strap-shaped barbules (rather than cylindrical), and angled barbules that projected from the plane of the feather (Fig. 4E, Table 1). Among the angled barbules, we observed a dihedral morphology insuper black and velvet red feathers as described previously for super black plumages of R. flammigerus29. Two of these unusual male morphological traits, which we assess through optical simulations, deserve special mention (Fig. 4).
Dihedral. In the dark red crown of R. carbo, feathers have densely packed, strap-shaped barbules pointing upwards out of the plane of the feather to form a dihedral structure, while the central barb was shaped like a razor or narrow triangular prism (Fig. 4C). Ramphocelus dimidiatus shared the dihedral morphology present in R. carbo in its upper throat feathers, which are a velvet red color (Fig. S8). Both are reminiscent of the structurally absorbing “super black” feather morphology present in Ramphocelus flammigerus29. Similar morphology, to a lesser degree, was observed in R. melanogaster velvet red throat feathers and in red feathers of both male and female R. sanguinolentis (Fig. S8G,J). To the human eye, dihedral feather structure generates a velvety appearance.
Expanded barb. Multiple species had expanded barbs, including the broad and roughly cylindrical barbs of the rump feathers of R. flammigerus (e.g., Fig. 4B,D, R. nigrogularis, and R. passerinii). These feathers also had flatter, strap-shaped barbules shorter in length than that of females but wider in width. Additionally, the rump and body feathers of R. dimidiatus are vivid red feathers with strong specular reflections; these feathers have a more extremely expanded central barb with a featureless surface (Fig. 4D). They also have upward-slanting, densely packed, strap-shaped barbules (Fig. 4D). Together, this generates (to the human eye) strong specular reflection at an angle, so that the bird shows flashes of white reflection when rotated in the hand.
A PCA of feather microstructure measurements demonstrated that males and female cluster separately and are not correlated (Fig. 4F; PC1 55.6%, PC2 20.8%; PGLS with microstructure PC1 scores: coefficient = -0.023, SE = 0.17, p = 0.90); a phylogenetic PCA was not possible to compare males and females, because such analyses can consider only one value per species, but we performed sex-specific phylogenetic PCAs of one patch per species and observed some clustering by clade for males (whole-body versus rumped, Fig. S6) and that females cluster tightly with the exception of outliers R. sanguinolentis and R. bresilius, both of which are females with wider-than-median barbs (Table 1). R. sanguinolentis is also the female with the most male-like scores in the regular PCA (Fig. 4F). Barb width, barbule width, barb oblongness, and interbarbule distance were primary axes along which males and females separated (Table S5). No species-specific or region-specific (e.g., rump feather versus chest feather) clustering was observed in these microstructural measurements (Fig. S6). In particular, it was important that we observed no region-specific variation in microstructure (i.e., rump feathers from one species did not cluster with rump feathers from other species).
To test whether microstructures may influence plumage appearance, we used a phylogenetic generalized least squares model to assess whether male microstructure PC scores (Fig. 4) correlate with to plumage saturation (Fig. 2). We found that PC2 was a significant correlate of plumage saturation, whereby more oblong and wider barbules were associated with more saturated plumage (PC2 coefficient = 20.8, SE 6.79, p < 0.025; see Fig. 4).
Using 2D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations of idealized feather cross-sections, we isolated the effect of two male-typical structure on reflectance: dihedral barbules and expanded, oblong barb. We selected these two features because they were associated with (i) male–female differences in color appearance within a species and (ii) within-bird color changes from bright, saturated red to dark, matte velvet red (Fig. S7).
We found that “dihedral” barbules29, projecting out of the plane of the feather and associated with super blacks and velvet reds in our study species, contribute to a lower reflectance (Fig. 6A). Total reflectance based on light-keratin interactions alone, without considering the contribution of melanin or carotenoids, drops from ~ 4% to 0.5% as barbules increase in angle from 0° to 80°. That is, the dihedral feather morphology in super black regions of these tanagers are made blacker in part due to structure. Likewise, the velvet red feathers in R. carbo and R. dimidiatus are made darker and more matte by melanin pigments in combination with dihedral barbule microstructure.
Further, we found that male-typical expanded feather barbs, which are wider than female barbs in 80% of species and more oblong than female barbs in 60% of our species (Table 1), substantially enhance optical power flow through the pigmented portion of the feather (Fig. 6B-C). In other words, this male-typical barb shape focuses light to cause greater light-pigment interactions, even though females and males across species have the same amount and types of pigment (Fig. 3). Therefore, the structure may contribute to a richer, more saturated color in the same manner as flower petals’ conical epidermal cells36. Interestingly, oblong and wide male barbs focus light more in particular regions within the feather barb (although they also increase optical power transmission generally across the whole barb, akin to flower petals37). Because the male-typical feathers focus light more on particular regions, it may be the case that pigments are not distributed evenly within the feather barb; further work with cross-sectional data is needed to investigate this idea.
We predicted that the ~ 30–45° angled barbules of many males, paired with an expanded barb, would further enhance color saturation, akin to angled flower petals causing a more saturated color77; simulations showed that the angled barbs contributed negligibly compared to the very large effect of an expanded barb. Across all sensitivity simulations (whole-feather, truncated feather, and feather with vacuole) and locations within the feather barb (side, top, and 45° angle) males had greater optical power transmission (Table S6; one-way paired t-test, p = 0.0021, mean of difference = -125.9, 95% CI = [-Inf, -64.2]).
It is important to note that these simulations represent idealized feather cross-sections, not real cross-sectional data. Our simulations provide proof-of-concept that expanded, oblong barbs in males focus light differently that simple barbs in females, enhancing color saturation; our simulation results are further buttressed by the observation that microstructural measurements are significantly correlated with color saturation (Fig. 5). However, further work to identify the specific locations of pigment, vacuoles, and internal nanostructures is needed to fully characterize these feathers.
Male barb microstructure correlates significantly with plumage saturation. Wider, more oblong male barbs are correlated with more saturated plumage, as measured through left-width half-maximum of reflectance curve (see Fig. 2). We performed a PGLS with microstructure PC2 and PC1 scores as independent variables, and with plumage saturation as dependent variable (PC2 coefficient = 20.8, SE 6.79, p < 0.025; PC1 coefficient = 12.6, SE = 7.49; p = 0.1361).
We used curve-fitting as a preliminary test of whether (i) melanin in females and/or (ii) the optical impacts of male microstructures, as identified by our FDTD simulations (Fig. 6), could explain male–female color differences (details in Supplemental Methods).
Optical simulations show that male-typical microstructures can (i) enhance blackness and (ii) increase color saturation. All simulations are finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations on 2D idealized feather cross-sections, simulating structural effects only without accounting for pigmentary absorption. (A) A male-typical black feather, with angled barbules, has structurally enhanced blackness compared to a female-typical feather with flat barbules. As the barbule angle increases out of the plane of the feather, percent reflectance arising from the keratin structure alone decreases from 4% to 0.5%. We did not simulate absorption effects of melanin, but instead we isolated the effect of structure alone. (B) For a female-typical colored feather, the amount of light passing through the pigmented barb (optical power transmission through red square) totals 452.4 W/m2. (C) For a male-typical colored feather, an oblong, expanded central barb increases the amount of light passing through the pigmented barb (optical power transmission through red square; totaling 788.1 W/m2). This enhanced power transmission enhances pigmentary activity for the same amount of incident light. For (A), each dot is the average of 3 simulations (and an error bar is plotted although not visible because all standard deviations were < 0.035). For (B,C), optical power transmission is shown for 700 nm light, at the center of a barb, and for a single simulation, but males have greater optical power transmission than females over all wavelengths, four different locations within the feather barb, and three simulation types (see methods; Table S6; one-way paired t-test, p = 0.0021, mean of difference = -125.9, 95% CI = [-Inf, -64.2]).
We found that both melanin and microstructures were required to explain male–female differences in colorful red and orange plumage (Fig. 7A–C). For both R. dimidiatus and R. bresilius, curve simulating “female minus melanin plus expanded barb” matched well with the observed reflectance spectra of male rumps (Hausdorff distances for male versus simulated female-melanin + structure were 0.7 (R. bresilius; compared to 7.5 before manipulation) and 1.9 (R. dimidiatus; compared to 10.8 before manipulation). However, for R. passerinii, the simulated curve (dashed black line Fig. 7C) was a poor match.
modified by Allison Shultz from original art by Gabriel Ugueto. For information about melanin presence, see Supplementary Information.
Curve-fitting with reflectance spectra suggests that male–female color differences are attributable to (i) melanin in females and (ii) microstructures in males. We manipulated real reflectance spectra of females to assess the role of melanin and microstructures in male–female differences (Supplementary Methods). We compared (A–C) colorful, saturated males to duller, browner female and (D–E) velvet red and super black males to relatively brighter females. (A) Reflectance spectra of a female R. dimidiatus rump (orange line), minus the effect of melanin (grey dashed line), and plus the predicted saturation increase due to an oblong expanded barb (dashed black line) matches well with observed reflectance spectra of a male R. dimidiatus rump (red line). Sigmoid curve parameters are afemale = 0.02, amale = 0.06, b = 620, c = 22. (B) Reflectance spectra of a female R. bresilius rump (orange line), minus the effect of melanin (grey dashed line), and plus the predicted saturation increase due to an expanded barb (dashed black line) matches well with observed reflectance spectra of a male R. bresilius rump (red line). Parameters are afemale = 0.02, amale = 0.06, b = 630, c = 20. (C) Reflectance spectra of a female R. passerinii rump (orange line), minus the effect of melanin (grey dashed line), and plus the predicted saturation increase of an expanded barb (dashed black line), is a poor match (purple arrow) for the observed reflectance spectra of a male R. passerinii rump (red line). Parameters are afemale = 0.02, amale = 0.06, b = 590, c = 14. (D) Reflectance spectra of female R. carbo dark red breast (red line), divided by 4 to indicate structural contribution of dihedral barbules at a ~ 35° angle (dashed black line), matches well to observed reflectance spectra of R. carbo dark matte red breast (dark red line). (E) Reflectance spectra of female R. f. icteronotus black back (grey line), divided by 8 to indicate structural contribution of dihedral barbules at a ~ 60° angle (dashed black line), matches well to observed reflectance spectra of male R. f. icteronotus super black back (black line). Divisors for each barbule angle can be found in Fig. 6A. Artwork in male silhouettes credit Gabriel Ugueto; female silhouettes are 
We found that microstructure alone—angled barbules—was sufficient to explain differences between (i) velvet red male, and brighter red female, plumages and (ii) super black male and normal black female plumages (Fig. 7D). For velvet red male R. carbo plumage, the corresponding female reflectance spectra divided by 4 matches closely to the male (Hausdorff distance 0.4), corresponding to barbules at an angle of ~ 35° (Fig. 6A). Likewise, for super black male R. f. icteronotus, female plumage divided by 8 matches well to the super black male (Hausdorff distance 0.05), which corresponds to barbules at an angle of ~ 60° (Fig. 6A).
To better assess the relative contribution of microstructure and pigment, we compared within-bird pigment profiles of shiny saturated red patches versus dark velvet red patches for both R. melanogaster and R. dimidiatus (Fig. S7). For each bird, these two patches had significantly correlated pigment profiles at equal levels for R. melanogaster and with slightly more pigment in the bright red region for R. dimidiatus (Fig. S7A,E; Regression output for R. melanogaster: slope = 0.99, SE = 0.051, R2 = 0.93, p < 0.0005. Regression output for R. dimidiatus: slope = 0.76, SE = 0.061, R2 = 0.85, p < 0.0005.) However, the SEM photos revealed large differences in feather microstructure between dark and bright patches (Fig. S2B,C,F,G). Expanded barbs were associated with bright saturated color while vertically-angled or dihedral barbules were associated with velvet red color. Importantly, digital light microscopy showed melanized barbules in the velvet red feathers of R. dimidiatus, suggesting that melanin is present in velvet red plumages.
Why are so many birds colorful? Our study directly addressed a proximate, physical “why” by showing that microstructures significantly enhance the red, orange, and yellow colors in male carotenoid plumages. Across species, colorful male and significantly drabber female Ramphocelus (Figs. 1–2) have significantly correlated carotenoid pigment profiles at a female:male ratio of 0.95 (Fig. 3). However, unusual microstructures in male (but not female) feathers augment male appearance in two ways (Figs. 4–7). First, wider, more oblong barbs in males create a more vivid, saturated color from structure alone without requiring more pigment. Second, dihedral barbules in male feathers produce (i) “velvet red” feathers adjacent to brilliantly reflective beaks and (ii) “super black” near colorful patches. We observe that microstructures contribute significantly to color signal appearance in males, rather than pigment alone.
But why are so many birds colorful? A deeper evolutionary “why” asks for the history of selective forces that produce colorful patterns and ornaments. Carotenoid-based coloration has often been invoked as a “textbook”6 or “classic”78 example of honest signaling, whereby the amount and types of pigments are thought to be costly or indicative of metabolic function6,7,8,20,79. In contrast to straightforward honest signaling theory, we propose that males have been selected to amplify their appearance by microstructural enhancers that are not themselves necessarily linked to quality. Our results show that pigments alone are insufficient to explain appearance, and therefore any theory of sexual selection (honest signaling or otherwise) must also explain the diversity of color-enhancing microstructures in males. Diverse microstructures in males suggest an evolutionary arms race between female preference and male appearance, which we term the “proxy treadmill”80. Our empirical results support past work by Fisher and others who predicted that one sex could evolve deceptive amplifiers in mate choice through an arms-race dynamic3,81,82,83,84. We discuss the proxy treadmill and other possible interpretations below.
Unexpectedly, males and females across species had significantly correlated carotenoid profiles in feathers with a female:male ratio of 0.95 (Fig. 3; MCMC glmm). Because our LCMS method does not allow direct comparisons between different pigments, we confirmed that male and female pigments do not differ significantly using a within-pigment-family phylogenetic paired t-test. These results are exploratory, across-species, findings (rather than precise within-species quantifications). See further discussion in Limitations section below.
If carotenoids were present in feathers as an honest (because costly) signal, it would be surprising to see the same levels in females (the choosing sex) as in males (the displaying sex). It is difficult to argue that the presence of carotenoids in feathers is costly, is favored in males because it is costly, but females who gain no benefit therefrom have been unable to exclude carotenoids from their feathers (and indeed deposit melanin to dampen the color; Fig. S4). However, it is still possible that carotenoids are an index of metabolic function or that sexual selection is acting on both males and females.
It is worth dedicating a few sentences to the significance of dietary versus metabolized carotenoids. Carotenoids are consumed in a yellow (dietary) form and then metabolized within vertebrate bodies to become redder in color; red, not yellow, carotenoids seem to drive correlations between male appearance and health6. Oddly, it appears that R. f. icteronotus and R. flammigerus evolved to use dietary carotenoids (yellow  and orange) from a likely ancestral state of metabolized (red) carotenoids (Fig. 3, Fig. S1;59). Yellow-to-red transitions, but not red-to-yellow, are common in model clades (fringillid finches85; new world blackbirds86). The possible reversion from red to yellow and orange documented herein is rare and worth further study; perhaps Ramphocelus males were not selected to display metabolically indicative or costly traits. In a hybrid zone, Morales-Rozo and colleagues demonstrate that the yellow R. f. icteronotus outcompetes the orange R. flammigerus in areas where both male phenotypes occur (i.e., where females have a choice87). Perhaps females prefer a less-elaborate, less-costly trait—as predicted by Hill81 for an arbitrary rather than honest signal. Further research should be done on the behavioral ecology of these fascinating tanagers to clarify female preferences and social interactions.
Feathers in Ramphocelus males, but not females, vary remarkably in microscopic structure (Table 1, Fig. 4, Fig. S8). Taken together, our data (Fig. 5), optical simulations (Fig. 6), and post-hoc curve fitting (Fig. 7) suggest that microstructures cause males to have more saturated colors than females, darker blacks than females, and—in some species—striking velvet red coloration.
Oblong, expanded barbs in males increase the optical power transmitted through the pigmented barb (Fig. 6B-C): more light interacts with the same amount of pigment to generate a more saturated, vivid color (Figs. 1, 2). This is analogous to conical epidermal cells in flower petals, which enhance light transmission through the whole petal but enhance it to a greater degree in the pigmented region37. Further cross-sectional studies of feather pigment location—and potentially impactful nanostructures (e.g. Fig. 8C)—would be invaluable.
Feather color is produced by three interacting features: pigments, nanostructures, and microstructures. This schematic is a simplified illustration of the major physical causes of feather color; plumages are immensely variable. (A) From left to right, we show (i) a feather, (ii) a zoomed-in view of the rachis, barb, and barbules; (iii) the barb and barbules; (iv) an idealized cross section of the central barb and barbules. (B) At the molecular scale, pigments such as melanin, canthaxanthin, and astaxanthin produce colors22,114,115. (C) At the sub-micrometer scale (< 1 µm), nanostructures116 such as filled melanosomes33, hollow melanosomes34, and spongy keratin matrices35 produce iridescent colors and blue colors. (D) Between 1 µm and 1 mm, microstructures of the barb and barbules affect pigment saturation, gloss, and brightness23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31. All illustrations in this figure are by A. Kimber.
Upward-angled barbs in a dihedral arrangement reduce total reflectance from a plumage (Fig. 6A) to make super black color (if paired with melanin) or velvet red color (if paired with carotenoids; see R. carbo Fig. 1D with velvet red adjacent to a brilliant silver beak). Super black color is an optical illusion which enhances the perceived brilliance of adjacent colors28,29,40,88,89,90, thereby potentially amplifying male appearance. The velvet red color in Ramphocelus tanagers calls to mind mourning cloak butterflies Nymphalis antiopa. It is intriguing to speculate that the structures causing super black in butterflies91 also underly this velvet red color in Nymphalis when combined with red (rather than black) pigment.
Research on microstructural variation in colorful displays, including sex differences, is expanding rapidly24,26,28,29,30,31,92. To gain more insight into evolutionary dynamics, we require a complete understanding of the physical basis of color. This means accounting for the optical effects of microstructures in addition to the traditionally studied pigments and nanostructures93 (Fig. 8).
Why did male feathers evolve elaborate microstructures? If female choice is a significant driver of male plumage, then males will be selected to produce female-preferred signals whether this is by changes to the chemical composition or microstructure of their feathers. From this perspective, the evolutionary dynamics of female preferences and male traits has aspects of an arms race between the conflicting interests of the sexes80,81,82,84,94,95. Females establish tests of quality and males are selected to pass these tests whether by ‘honest’ displays or ‘gaming’ the test. Rather than eating and metabolizing more carotenoids to honestly signal a more saturated red5,6,7,8,9 males could use microstructural amplifiers to make their plumage appear a more saturated red. Following substantial past work80,81,82,83,84,94,96, we suggest that males, under intense selection to satisfy testing criteria by choosy females, evolve “amplifiers” to honest signals (in this case, microstructures that enhance light-pigment interactions).
Perhaps red carotenoid-based colors were favored by female selection as an index of physiological health, but selection on males to deliver a saturated red signal by whatever means gradually diluted the information about male quality81. As males exaggerate their appearance, females are selected to develop additional quality tests to separate the wheat from the chaff (e.g., females may prefer even more saturated feathers or new, additional ornaments). Because females cannot unilaterally abandon a prior quality test without dooming their sons to being unattractive, male ornaments may pile atop one another, potentially causing extreme and elaborate signals. This is the proxy treadmill80: signal traits become exaggerated as proxies of quality are continuously modified or replaced (because examinees are under strong selective pressure to inflate their apparent quality, thus devaluing any given proxy).
Males of many taxa find ways to amplify their carotenoid signals. Male guppies (Poecilia reticulata) have orange carotenoid-colored spots for sexual display. Recall that carotenoids must be eaten and metabolized rather than synthesized de novo, a commonly-cited reason supporting the idea that carotenoids are honest signals. Guppies synthesize (de novo) red pteridine pigments (drosopterins) similar in hue to carotenoids and include these pigments in their red spots. The authors suggest that male guppies use drosopterin pigments “in a manner that dilutes, but does not eliminate, the indicator value of carotenoid coloration”78. Greater flamingos (Phoenicopterus roseus), a classic example of carotenoid-colored birds, amplify their plumage color by “applying cosmetics”: they secrete carotenoid-colored preen oils to coat their feathers, and do so more often during display times97. In these and other cases, it is difficult to test which elements of multicomponent signals are linked to quality (if any).
Beyond carotenoids, direct evidence for deceptive elements to honest signaling have been reported in many invertebrates98,99,100 and a few vertebrates101,102,103. Beyond mate choice, the analogous arena of embryo selection shows evidence of the proxy treadmill80. During human pregnancy, embryos “audition” for the role of a lifetime104 and must pass signaling “checkpoints” to be carried to term105. One measure of embryo quality, the signaling hormone chorionic gonadotropin, has seen an extreme inflation over evolutionary time with no clear functional significance80—reminiscent of the elaborate microstructures that underpin male Ramphocelus color. Goodhart’s Law in economics and the analogous Campbell’s Law describe this well-observed phenomenon: “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure”106.
In addition to our proposal—the proxy treadmill—sexual selection is complex and many selective forces likely interact to influence coloration, including predation risk16,107, intra-sex aggression12,13,14,17, honest signaling via the structures themselves108,109,110,111, arbitrary preferences2, and species recognition1. Perhaps in these tanagers, both sexes are subject to sexual selection for carotenoid colors, but with sex-dependent tradeoffs between naturally selected crypticity (higher in females) and sexually selected conspicuousness (higher in males).
We would like to note limitations of this exploratory study which should be addressed in detailed follow-up work. First, we have data from only one male and one female of each of ten species; future work could include data from many males and many females per species in order to conduct detailed within-species comparisons. Second, we do not report cross-sectional data for our feathers, which could be achieved through transmission electron microscopy for detailed future work on optics. Third, we used a mechanical extraction procedure for the carotenoids, and it would be useful to conduct follow-up tests comparing this extraction procedure to pyridine extraction112. Fourth, we used LCMS to identify carotenoids with signal strength as a proxy for amount. The signal strengths cannot be compared directly between pigment families because carotenoids ionize differently depending on the molecular structure. Therefore, follow-up work could employ more tradition UV–Vis quantification. Fifth, we did not look for carotenoid esters, which can comprise a portion of feather pigments53; therefore future work could benefit from UV–Vis-MS analyses. Finally, more work is needed to understand which, if any, structural components of feather color are linked to quality (see113 for an analysis of carotenoids paired with white structural color; Shawkey et al. found that the structural color in this case is “probably not condition dependent”113).
Few studies quantify plumage signals in both males and females, but a comparative approach can advance our understanding of evolution44. More broadly, signals cannot be pigeonholed as purely honest, purely deceptive, or purely arising from one selective force. Individuals struggle to satisfy many competing selective pressures that vary over time and space, from avoiding predators to finding a mate. Nature is red in tooth, claw, and male tanager feathers.
