Effects of surgical face masks on cardiopulmonary parameters during steady state exercise
Wearing face masks reduce the maximum physical performance. Sports and occupational activities are often associated with submaximal constant intensities. This prospective crossover study examined the effects of medical face masks during constant-load exercise. Fourteen healthy men (age 25.7 ± 3.5 years; height 183.8 ± 8.4 cm; weight 83.6 ± 8.4 kg) performed a lactate minimum test and a body plethysmography with and without masks. They were randomly assigned to two constant load tests at maximal lactate steady state with and without masks. The cardiopulmonary and metabolic responses were monitored using impedance cardiography and ergo-spirometry. The airway resistance was two-fold higher with the surgical mask (SM) than without the mask (SM 0.58 ± 0.16 kPa l−1 vs. control [Co] 0.32 ± 0.08 kPa l−1; p < 0.01). The constant load tests with masks compared with those without masks resulted in a significantly different ventilation (77.1 ± 9.3 l min−1 vs. 82.4 ± 10.7 l min−1; p < 0.01), oxygen uptake (33.1 ± 5 ml min−1 kg−1 vs. 34.5 ± 6 ml min−1 kg−1; p = 0.04), and heart rate (160.1 ± 11.2 bpm vs. 154.5 ± 11.4 bpm; p < 0.01). The mean cardiac output tended to be higher with a mask (28.6 ± 3.9 l min−1 vs. 25.9 ± 4.0 l min−1; p = 0.06). Similar blood pressure (177.2 ± 17.6 mmHg vs. 172.3 ± 15.8 mmHg; p = 0.33), delta lactate (4.7 ± 1.5 mmol l−1 vs. 4.3 ± 1.5 mmol l−1; p = 0.15), and rating of perceived exertion (6.9 ± 1.1 vs. 6.6 ± 1.1; p = 0.16) were observed with and without masks. Surgical face masks increase airway resistance and heart rate during steady state exercise in healthy volunteers. The perceived exertion and endurance performance were unchanged. These results may improve the assessment of wearing face masks during work and physical training.
During the coronavirus disease pandemic, face masks are widely recommended in medical and public areas1,2. Wearing face masks should reduce virus transmission3,4,5,6. However, the evidence of its usefulness for reducing respiratory virus infections is heterogeneous3,7,8. Besides its potential virus preventive effects, the use of face masks has shown increased respiratory resistance9. In addition, Fikenzer et al. showed a reduction in maximal physical capacity and ventilation. Occupational or physical stress may therefore be higher when using face masks and may be accompanied by an increased perception of exertion or dyspnea in patients10.
Respiratory protective devices or additional external breathing resistance showed similar effects on exercise capacity and ventilation11,12. Less marked, though comparable, results were obtained with the use of mouthguards13,14,15,16.
Maximum physical stress rarely occurs in occupational settings17. Rather, physical activity with medium or submaximal intensity is the norm. Even in leisure sports, constant-load exercise is often chosen for training. To date, no data exist on the effects of face masks on cardiopulmonary parameters during continuous exercise. Such data may allow the assessment of training and workloads associated with the use of medical masks. Specifically, possible cardiopulmonary overload due to the use of face masks could be avoided.
In summary, information on the effects of face masks during continuous exercise is lacking. Therefore, this randomized crossover study was aimed at assessing the effects of face masks on cardiopulmonary and metabolic effects at maximal lactate steady state (MLSS). Owing to the first known effects of using face masks18, a stronger cardiopulmonary response should be expected in the tests with masks.
Body plethysmography analyses showed significant differences among the lung function parameters (Table 1).
The respiratory work were calculated from the peak flow and airway resistance (RAW) and showed significant differences (Co 3.0 ± 0.7 kPa vs. SM 4.6 ± 1.2 kPa, p < 0.01, n2p = 0.71).
The maximum values of DIET are shown in Table 2. The average duration of DIET was 17:42 ± 2:42 min, and the participants reached an average Pmax of 300.7 ± 40.5 W, which corresponds to a relative power of 3.70 ± 0.63 W kg−1. The lactate minimum in this test was 202.69 ± 25.95 W with an LAC of 6.48 ± 1.35 mmol l−1.
There were visible changes resting values for VE, BP, CO, and inspiration time (Ti) (VE: Co 13.82 ± 5.79 l min−1 vs. SM 10.14 ± 2.78 l min−1; RR: Co 19.44 ± 4.33 bpm vs. SM 16.58 ± 4.90 bpm; Ti: Co 1.34 ± 0.21 s vs. SM 1.63 ± 0.31 s). The resting lactate values were lower with SMs than with Co (Co 0.92 ± 0.26 mmol l−1 vs. SM 0.79 ± 0.25 mmol l−1). There were no visible differences in the hemodynamics. Figure 3 shows the time course of HR, CO, SV, and BP in the two constant-load tests. Table 2 shows the results of the constant-load tests. Thirteen participants completed 30 min of exercise in both tests. One test participant could not perform the test with a SM because of subjectively perceived breathing distress.
Graphs showing the mean cardiac responses (n = 13) during the continuous load test with (SM) and without (Co) a surgical mask. (A) HR: heart rate; (B) SV: stroke volume; (C) CO: cardiac output; (D) SBP & DBP: systolic & diastolic blood pressure. Rest values were determined immediately prior to exercise.
Table 2 shows the average values of the constant load tests (30 min) and the peak values of the DIET.
The main finding of this randomized crossover study was that the use of SMs during constant exercise was associated with significant changes in the values of the pulmonary and cardiac parameters as compared without the use of face masks (Figs. 3 and 4). Body plethysmography revealed a two-fold higher RAW when masks were used. However, the \({\text{VO}}_{2}\) and avDO2 was reduced when SMs were used. Despite these cardiopulmonary changes, the constant load tests at maximal lactate steady state were completed with exception of one test subject when using masks.
The graphs show the mean cardiac responses (n = 13) during the continuous load test with and without a surgical mask. (A) VE: minute ventilation; (B) VO2: oxygen uptake; (C) LAC: blood lactate concentration; (D) RPE: rating of perceived exertion (D). The rest values were determined immediately prior to exercise.
Body plethysmography revealed an increased RAW and reduced forced expiratory volume in 1 s, VC, and peak expiratory flow with SMs. Respiratory protective devices and respiratory filters have similar effects9,11. Exercise studies showed that an increased RAW can also significantly reduce VE under stress and can decrease work performance11,12,16,18. Similar results were also shown in studies with mouthguards where a slightly increased RAW and reduced respiratory parameters were observed at rest and during exercise16. A reduced RR with corresponding changes in Ti was observed. The expiratory time and VT were not affected by the use of masks. The extended Ti is probably a compensatory mechanism that stabilizes VT under these conditions13,14. Francis and Brasher assumed that a mechanism similar to the “pursed lip” type of breathing in pulmonary obstructive patients extends the respiratory cycle time and thus promotes gas exchange. As a result, the alveolar \({\dot{\text{V}}}_{{\text{A}}}\) is significantly reduced by using a mask. Therefore, the displayed reduction in oxygen uptake is expected.
However, the increased RAW values lead to a changed exercise breathing pattern in healthy volunteers with a slowed restriction of \({\text{VO}}_{2}\)11,18. We can assume that patients with pulmonary obstructive disease are exposed to far greater restrictions than when wearing a SM10. These results show a clear effect of wearing SMs on pulmonary parameters at rest and during exercise (Fig. 4).
In the present study, the use of SMs resulted in a significantly increased HR, a physiologically substantial nevertheless not significant increased SV, and tendency toward an increased CO. The increased HR during constant-load exercise with a mask might be the result of increased work of breathing or muscle affarences19. By contrast, other studies with oxygen-enriched air in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease showed a decrease in heart rate23. Furthermore, increased respiratory muscle work due to reflex mechanisms could also be responsible for the increase in CO9,24.
Ryan et al.25 showed that under resting conditions, increased RAW can lead to a significant increase in SV. The observed prolonged Ti and increased RAW suggest a change in pulmonary regulation when using a SM. Prolonged or higher negative pleural pressure is assumed to improve the transmural pressure difference of the extrathoracic and intrathoracic vessels25,26. This may increase venous blood return and improve SV16,18,25,26,27. Use of a mouthguard increased the RAW, prolonged the Ti, and increased the SV during physical stress16. Similar results were reported in a study by Fikenzer et al.18, which showed a trend toward an increased SV when using a SM, with a reduced VE and significantly extended Ti. In contrast to the present results, Fikenzer et al. showed significantly lower maximum heart rate values when a SM was used during incremental exercise. However, constant load exercise was performed in the present study, and the results may therefore not be comparable.
The subjective perceived stress (Borg scale) showed no significant difference between the performances during the constant load tests. During incremental exercise, the difference in perceived stress and performance with and without masks was determined18. A limitation of the perceived and completed performance due to the wearing of SMs was not observed in our study. The LAC∆ tended to be higher (10.6% not statistically significant) and avDO2 was reduced when SMs were used.
The reduced avDO2 in physical stress is consistent with the findings of other studies18 with face masks. Presumably, \({\text{VO}}_{2}\) was lower because of the decreased \({\dot{\text{V}}}_{A}\). The reduced tissue oxygenation due to ventilatory obstruction was speculated to be responsible for the higher lactate values and cardiac drive from the working muscles19. The present results refer to young healthy men and can therefore be considered as a reference for this cohort.
The study group was small and consisted of healthy men. Therefore, the data cannot be transferred to other populations. Thus, an assessment of the effect of face masks in older people and in patients with lung and heart diseases is limited. This study is the first crossover study to date that compared the acute cardiopulmonary effects during constant load (MLSS) with and without medical face masks. The cardiac parameters measured using impedance cardiography can be overestimated with absolute values28. However, thoracic impedance cardiography is well established for the quantification of individual changes in SV and CO29. The fact that the SM was worn under the spirometry mask because of a definitive seal between the SM and the face must also be taken into account. This changes the natural position of the SM and might have influenced the results.
