Adaptation to recent outcomes attenuates the lasting effect of initial experience on risky decisions
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-89456-1
Both primarily and recently encountered information have been shown to influence experience-based risky decision making. The primacy effect predicts that initial experience will influence later choices even if outcome probabilities change and reward is ultimately more or less sparse than primarily experienced. However, it has not been investigated whether extended initial experience would induce a more profound primacy effect upon risky choices than brief experience. Therefore, the present study tested in two experiments whether young adults adjusted their risk-taking behavior in the Balloon Analogue Risk Task after an unsignaled and unexpected change point. The change point separated early “good luck” or “bad luck” trials from subsequent ones. While mostly positive (more reward) or mostly negative (no reward) events characterized the early trials, subsequent trials were unbiased. In Experiment 1, the change point occurred after one-sixth or one-third of the trials (brief vs. extended experience) without intermittence, whereas in Experiment 2, it occurred between separate task phases. In Experiment 1, if negative events characterized the early trials, after the change point, risk-taking behavior increased as compared with the early trials. Conversely, if positive events characterized the early trials, risk-taking behavior decreased after the change point. Although the adjustment of risk-taking behavior occurred due to integrating recent experiences, the impact of initial experience was simultaneously observed. The length of initial experience did not reliably influence the adjustment of behavior. In Experiment 2, participants became more prone to take risks as the task progressed, indicating that the impact of initial experience could be overcome. Altogether, we suggest that initial beliefs about outcome probabilities can be updated by recent experiences to adapt to the continuously changing decision environment.
Decision making is supported by generating predictions about the probability of upcoming events. Many of these predictions are guided by inferences based on prior experiences with a similar situation or early experiences with the current situation. Considering risky choices, if we learned that regulations were moderate and had the repeated experience that driving beyond the speed limit did not end in negative consequences, we would be more likely to continue this behavior. However, in the case of stricter regulations, this habitual choice behavior becomes disadvantageous and should be overcome. Adaptation to the newly encountered regulations is probably gradual but takes an unknown amount of time, depending on several factors. Accordingly, this study employs an experience-based risky decision-making paradigm to investigate whether initial experience or the combination of initial and recent experiences had stronger impact on risk-taking behavior after an unsignaled change in outcome probabilities.
When decisions are made under uncertainty, such as in the present study, the probability distribution of the possible outcomes is unknown1,2,3,4,5. The probability distribution can be approximated via repeated sampling and inference; therefore, these decisions are based on experience instead of description6,7. Decisions made under uncertainty differ from those made under explicit risk. In the latter case, although outcomes are unknown, outcome probabilities are described a priori and known by the individuals. Consequently, these two types of decisions differ in their underlying processes, as well. For instance, decisions under uncertainty are less dependent on executive functions and involve the use of heuristics or somatic markers (for review, see1,4). In day-to-day life, we make decisions mostly from experience in uncertain situations.
It has long been investigated how and under which conditions belief updating about outcome probabilities occurs in various decision-making situations (cf.8). For instance, the temporal order of information seems to play a considerable role when decisions are uncertain and based on experience6. According to the anchoring and adjustment heuristic, initial beliefs based on limited observations serve as a reference point that is adjusted as information accumulates. The initial anchor’s effect is probably long-lasting since adjustments are usually insufficient and biased toward the initial values9. Meanwhile, the complexity of the task, the amount of new evidence, and the response mode (responding after integrating each piece of evidence or after the presentation of all pieces of evidence) have been shown to influence the effect of information order8. Thus, there are conditions under which primacy, recency, or no order effects, respectively, are more likely to occur.
Evidence from studies targeting or modeling real-life risky situations supports the combination of both primacy and recency effects. Based on survey data, it was shown that those who had experienced great macroeconomic shocks became financially more risk averse in their later lives; for instance, they were less likely to participate in the stock market10. Although recent experiences received more weight than more distant ones, the impact of experiences that had happened even years earlier remained significant. This so-called depression baby hypothesis has also been tested with simulated experimental stock market experiments where participants hypothetically invested in safe (cash deposit account) and risky (stock index fund) options11. These experiments manipulated whether participants learned from experience (played the investment game) or from symbolic description (only studied graphs of the initial period) and whether the data included or excluded initial macroeconomic crisis (negative shock) or boom (positive shock). Depending on the valence of the initial shock, participants who learned from experience took less or more risks than those who learned from description (cf.6,12). Importantly, the most recent experience also played a role in participants’ investment behavior that was reactive to local fluctuations in stock prices, irrespective of experimental manipulations.
Other studies of sequential decision making indicate the prominence of recency effect13. Due to the continuous tracking of the recent outcomes, in nonstationary stochastic environments, individuals accurately estimated the underlying probabilities and quickly updated their estimates if there was a change in these probabilities14,15,16. The prominent impact of recently observed outcomes was also demonstrated for the sequential sampling of gambles and their valuation17,18.
The studies described so far suggest that individuals could successfully use recently observed evidence to adapt to the changing environment (cf.19). However, fast adaptation to initial payoff probabilities followed by only slow adaptation to changes in these probabilities was also found, especially if the history summarizing previous outcomes was explicitly provided to participants20,21. In addition, as demonstrated in a hypothetical stock market game, the initially established decision strategy was retained even though it became no longer optimal22. A hint about the change, monetary incentives, or transfer to another task with the same deep structure but different surface could not adequately support the update of this original decision strategy. Therefore, depending on the decision situation, belief updating could also be difficult or completely missing.
Among tasks requiring sequential decisions, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) has been a widely used laboratory measure because its structure and appearance mimic naturalistic risk taking23,24,25,26. This task requires sequential decisions on risk in the form of inflating virtual balloons on a screen. Participants are told that each balloon pump is associated with either a balloon inflation or a balloon burst. While balloon inflations are followed by reward (increasing score), balloon bursts are followed by no reward (loss of score accumulated on the given balloon). However, the outcome of each successive pump (inflation vs. burst) and the probability distribution determining the outcome are unknown to participants. As the task progresses, participants could learn about the payoff structure in a trial-and-error manner to maximize the total reward. Thus, the BART measures decision making under uncertainty and experience-based risk, at least during the early trials1,2,3,4,27.
To our knowledge, two studies investigated whether beliefs about outcome probabilities are updated if these probabilities change considerably after a certain balloon in the BART. The study of Koscielniak et al.28 showed that initial good luck and bad luck modulated subsequent adaptation. After the unlucky series (bursts on the first three balloons after three, four, and one pumps, irrespective of the participant’s choice), the number of balloon inflations gradually increased in the following phases of the task. After the lucky series (bursts on the first three balloons after 25, 27, and 28 pumps), their number was higher only in the first phase following manipulation and decreased in the middle and final phases. However, the number of balloon inflations remained different between the bad luck and good luck conditions in every phase. The study of Bonini et al.29 used five early losses (bursts at the first, second, third, second, and first pumps) in a modified BART and contrasted the observed balloon inflations with that of an original BART. Healthy control participants showed a lower number of balloon inflations across the remaining balloons of the modified BART as compared with the original BART. As the task progressed, they increased the number of balloon inflations, and this increase was steeper in the modified BART.
In sum, although early negative events in the BART decreased overall risk taking (i.e., fewer balloon inflations), experience with more balloons still increased it gradually10,11. Nevertheless, previous studies manipulated only the very first trials by using extremely high or low balloon tolerances. Therefore, it has not been systematically tested whether longer initial experience might result in more persistent primacy effect and weaker subsequent adaptation to the changed payoff structure than shorter experience, in line with the existing accounts (cf.8,10,20).
Accordingly, the present study investigated how different lengths of initial experience influenced risk-taking behavior during sequential sampling of outcome probabilities without signaling the change in the payoff structure. In Experiment 1, the first five (short manipulation) or ten (long manipulation) balloons of the task consisting of 30 balloons were manipulated to induce negative or positive initial experience. While the results of Experiment 1 suggested that different lengths of both negative and positive initial experiences could be overcome to a limited extent, two questions remained unanswered. First, because the underlying payoff structure changed at different times across the long and short experimental conditions, participants encountered a slightly different series of unbiased balloons after the manipulated phase. Therefore, the potential to change risk taking on the unbiased balloons was differently constrained across the length conditions. Second, without baseline experience (i.e., a reference level), whether lucky and unlucky experiences indeed led to more and less risk taking was not measured directly (cf.30). To address these issues, in Experiment 2, the manipulated phase was separated from the subsequent phase. The payoff structure of the subsequent phase that was used to quantify the update of risk-taking behavior was identical across the experimental conditions. The manipulated phase included baseline, positive, or negative experience, respectively. The length of initial experience was not manipulated, as it did not reliably modulate the change in risk taking in Experiment 1.
Although several hypotheses follow from previous literature, the analyses conducted in this study were exploratory. The following hypotheses were formulated after data collection. In Experiment 1, if initial experience were long, its profound and constraining effect on risk-taking behavior could be hypothesized (i.e., more/less balloon inflations after positive/negative experience, cf.8,11). In contrast, a more limited primacy effect could be expected if initial experience were short. In the latter case, initial and more recent experiences would be combined, which yields similar risk-taking behavior later in the task, irrespective of the valence of initial experience31. In Experiment 2, it could be hypothesized that the effect of initial experience would be carried over to the subsequent task phase32,33. Since the separate manipulated phase of Experiment 2 consisted of the same number of balloons as the long condition of Experiment 1, similar results were expected to be found. Having been aware of the results of Experiment 1, after positive and negative experience in the initial phase, the presence of the primacy effect was hypothesized, which could be, at least partially, overcome (i.e., balloon inflations would be overall less/more after negative/positive experience but could increase/decrease as the task progresses). After the baseline experience, a relatively constant risk-taking behavior was expected that would be similar between the initial and subsequent task phases. In addition, it was also expected that negative experience would be more different from baseline than positive experience in terms of balloon inflations (cf.34).
In Experiment 1, using a modified BART, we manipulated the first five or ten balloons out of the 30 balloons. We created lucky and unlucky runs of trials by providing the possibility to inflate the balloons to a larger size (lucky condition) or to experience frequent balloon bursts even after relatively few balloon pumps (unlucky condition). We crossed these conditions with the length of the initial experience (long condition: ten balloons vs. short condition: five balloons) to check whether the length of exposure to lucky or unlucky events differently influenced subsequent risk-taking behavior. These manipulations were based on the assumption that participants tended to gain some experience with the task in terms of action-outcome mapping (i.e., they tended to inflate the balloons instead of being risk averse2,35), which would have enabled them to experience lucky and unlucky runs of events.
To ease meta-analytic work, Table 1 shows overall performance on the different versions of the BART presented in this paper measured by classical indices such as the mean adjusted number of pumps, the number of balloon bursts, and the total score that is the sum of reward (points) in the end of the task. In the results section below, the “number of pumps” or “pump number” refers to the number of pumps on balloons that did not burst. Only those effects are detailed from the balloon-wise and bin-wise analyses that are relevant regarding the hypotheses. The summary of all effects included in the linear mixed-effects models is presented in Table 3. Since the treatment contrast provides inferential tests of simple effects and simple interactions (except for the highest-order effects), these terms are used below, if relevant. 
After long initial manipulation had ended, unlucky experience yielded lower number of pumps on the remaining balloons than lucky experience (significant simple effect of Luck, β =  − 4.29, SE = 0.81, t(151.71) =  − 5.33, p < .001). However, as the task progressed, while the number of pumps increased on the remaining balloons in the unlucky long condition, it decreased in the lucky long condition (significant Luck * Balloon interaction, β = 0.12, SE = 0.03, t(468.51) = 4.00, p < .001; see Fig. 1a,c). More specifically, as compared with the first Bin after initial manipulation (i.e., Bin3), a significant decrease in the lucky long versus unlucky long difference (Luck effect) was evidenced from Bin4 until the end of the task (all βs ≥ 1.89, SEs ≤ 0.51, ts ≥ 3.71, ps < .001, see Table 3). A contrast matrix was set up that defined the comparison of Luck effect across the levels of Bin. Pairwise tests showed that the Luck effect did not change further across Bin4–Bin6 (│zs│ ≤ 1.46, ps ≥ .310).
Results of Experiment 1. The numbers of pumps on balloons that did not burst are presented in each time bin in the long manipulation (a) and short manipulation (b) conditions, respectively. Vertical dotted lines indicate that (lucky or unlucky) initial manipulation ended after the second (long manipulation) or the first (short manipulation) time bin. Each time bin consists of five consecutive balloons. Figure part (c) shows the numbers of pumps on balloons that did not burst across all conditions and balloons. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals for means, depicted with continuous lines. Points denote individual data points in all figure parts. Figures were created using the ggplot2 package68.
After short initial manipulation had ended, unlucky experience yielded lower number of pumps on the remaining balloons than lucky experience (significant simple effect of Luck, β =  − 3.52, SE = 0.47, t(157.37) =  − 7.49, p < .001). Meanwhile, the number of pumps increased on the remaining balloons in the unlucky short condition and decreased in the lucky short condition (significant Luck * Balloon interaction, β = 0.08, SE = 0.02, t(557.14) = 3.98, p < .001; see Fig. 1b,c). Particularly, as compared with the first Bin after initial manipulation (i.e., Bin2), a significant decrease in the lucky short vs. unlucky short difference (Luck effect) appeared in Bin3 and was present until the end of the task (all βs ≥ 1.12, SEs ≤ 0.50, ts ≥ 2.75, ps ≤ .006, see Table 3). Pairwise tests showed that this Luck effect did not change further across Bin3–Bin6 (│zs│ ≤ 1.73, ps ≥ .304).
Due to both long and short initial manipulations, the number of pumps was consistently lower in unlucky than in lucky conditions across the remaining balloons of the task. Meanwhile, this difference decreased in the second half of the task after experiencing approximately five unbiased balloons following initial manipulation. While participants in the unlucky condition increased pumping, those in the lucky condition slightly decreased this behavior in the remainder of the task, indicating the adjustment of behavior to recent experience. Although it seems that participants in all conditions adjusted their behavior in an opposite manner as a function of luck, it was not clear from these analyses whether the effect of long or short initial experience was more pronounced. This was tested below with Model 5.
When all conditions and balloons (manipulated and unbiased) were considered together, in line with the results above, consistently lower pump number in the unlucky than in the lucky condition was found (significant simple effect of Luck, β =  − 5.46, SE = 0.45, t(149.45) =  − 12.01, p < .001). The simple effect of Length was not significant, β = 0.42, SE = 0.44, t(133.84) = 0.95, p = .345 (but see the bin-wise model in Supplementary Table S1). As shown by the significant Luck * Length * Balloon interaction, β =  − 0.05, SE = 0.02, t(1415.53) = − 2.32, p = .020, although the number of pumps increased in the unlucky condition and decreased in the lucky condition (significant simple interaction of Luck * Balloon), this change differed between the long and short conditions (see Fig. 1c).
Based on the bin-wise analysis summarized in Supplementary Table S1 and the visual inspection of Fig. 1c, this significant three-way interaction indicated the local effectiveness of initial manipulation and not the length of initial experience modulating behavior adjustment. Particularly, the lucky vs. unlucky difference was smaller in the short than in the long manipulation conditions in Bin2 and Bin3 than at the beginning of the task. This was due to short manipulation had ended by Bin2 and the lucky versus unlucky difference started to decrease (see the steeply increasing pump number in the unlucky short condition). More importantly, during the second half of the task (Bin4, Bin5, and Bin6 as compared with Bin1), no difference appeared between the short and long conditions in how the lucky versus unlucky difference changed as the task progressed. Therefore, experiencing unlucky balloons either for longer or shorter duration yielded similar pump number after the integration of recent experiences. Altogether, these modeling results with all experimental factors considered not only corroborated previous results (Model 1–4) but also revealed that behavior adjustment in the second half of the task was comparable between the length manipulation conditions.
In Experiment 1, we showed that initial experience influenced subsequent risk-taking behavior. Unlucky compared with lucky initial experience led to overall lower risk taking. More importantly, approximately five balloons after the change in structure, participants with both lucky and unlucky experience started to update their behavior: The number of pumps increased following unlucky experience, while it decreased following lucky experience in the remainder of the task. The pattern of change was comparable between long and short manipulation conditions. This is partially in contrast to the expectation that a persistent risk-averse behavior would be present after a long series of unlucky events (i.e., primacy effect). Namely, albeit unlucky participants converged to a more risk-averse behavior in both length manipulation conditions, behavior adjustment was still observed due to combining the outcomes of more recent balloon pumps with initial experience.
In Experiment 1, the number of balloons and their tolerance in the remaining phase of the task differed across conditions, which could have influenced how recent outcomes were evaluated and used in updating. Furthermore, one cannot tell whether lucky and unlucky experiences were more positive or more negative than a baseline experience. Experiment 2 aimed to address these shortcomings. Since the length of initial experience did not modulate behavior adjustment, length was not manipulated in Experiment 2. Without length manipulation, it was also ensured that all participants encounter the same number of balloons. Therefore, any change in risk-taking behavior would be due to the valence of initial experience and not merely a longer horizon for post-manipulation updating.
In Experiment 2, we manipulated a separate initial phase with ten balloons that preceded a subsequent phase with 30 balloons. This design enabled us to analyze risk-taking behavior on the exact same sequence of 30 balloons across all conditions in the subsequent phase. In the initial phase, we used three conditions: baseline, lucky, and unlucky. With the use of the baseline condition, we could compare with a reference level whether individuals are more prone to take risks due to lucky initial experience and less prone to take risks due to unlucky initial experience.
