Congolius, a new genus of African reed frog endemic to the central Congo: A potential case of convergent evolution
The reed frog genus Hyperolius (Afrobatrachia, Hyperoliidae) is a speciose genus containing over 140 species of mostly small to medium-sized frogs distributed in sub-Saharan Africa. Its high level of colour polymorphism, together with in anurans relatively rare sexual dichromatism, make systematic studies more difficult. As a result, the knowledge of the diversity and taxonomy of this genus is still limited. Hyperolius robustus known only from a handful of localities in rain forests of the central Congo Basin is one of the least known species. Here, we have used molecular methods for the first time to study the phylogenetic position of this taxon, accompanied by an analysis of phenotype based on external (morphometric) and internal (osteological) morphological characters. Our phylogenetic results undoubtedly placed H. robustus out of Hyperolius into a common clade with sympatric Cryptothylax and West African Morerella. To prevent the uncovered paraphyly, we place H. robustus into a new genus, Congolius. The review of all available data suggests that the new genus is endemic to the central Congolian lowland rain forests. The analysis of phenotype underlined morphological similarity of the new genus to some Hyperolius species. This uniformity of body shape (including cranial shape) indicates that the two genera have either retained ancestral morphology or evolved through convergent evolution under similar ecological pressures in the African rain forests.
African reed frogs, Hyperoliidae Laurent, 1943, are presently encompassing almost 230 species in 17 genera. These are split into two subfamilies, Hyperoliinae Laurent, 1943 with 12 genera, and the less speciose subfamily Kassininae Laurent, 1972 with 5 genera1,2 (Table 1). The phylogenetic relationships among the hyperoliid frogs are still not completely understood, and the systematics has undergone recent changes, e.g., revalidation of the subfamily Kassininae and reclassification of Acanthixalus to this subfamily1 or genus-level reorganizations in some species3. There is also a number of genera whose classification to the family is clear on the basis of morphological characters, but their exact phylogenetic position is still an unanswered question. In the Congo Basin, an important region for our study, it is the case of three monotypic genera. Callixalus pictus Laurent, 1950 and Chrysobatrachus cupreonitens Laurent, 1951 were described from high-altitude bamboo forests and grasslands of the Albertine Rift4,5, and Kassinula wittei Laurent, 1940 is known from wooded savanna uplands of south-eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Zambia, and recently from central Angola6,7. Some previous morphological studies provided rough ideas where these genera might be phylogenetically placed8,9, but the first two genera have never been studied by a molecular approach. All three genera are presently placed in Hyperoliinae1,2, neverthless, the hypothesized sister relationship of Callixalus and Acanthixalus8,9 keeps the question on the phylogenetic position of Callixalus open. Similar uncertainties apply to Chrysobatrachus and Kassinula. However, the latter has a characteristically different morphology, resembling either Kassina6,10, Paracassina8, or Afrixalus7,9. Newly, Kassinula was shown to be phylogenetically related to Afrixalus, possibly even embed within this genus7. A recent surprise in the hyperoliid systematics was the discovery of Morerella cyanophthalma Rödel, Assemian, Kouamé, Tohé & Perret, 2009, a monotypic genus from the coastal rain forests of Côte d’Ivoire in West Africa11. The study included phylogenetic analysis of three mitochondrial markers, which did place the genus in Hyperoliidae, but did not resolve its exact systematic position. Later studies, which comprised phylogenetic or phylogenomic analyses of nuclear DNA, uncovered affiliation of Morerella to Cryptothylax from Central African rain forests1,3.

More than a half of all hyperoliids belong to the genus Hyperolius distributed throughout sub-Saharan Africa2,  12. Hyperolius is a genus of mostly medium-sized and exclusively arboreal frogs with a great variation in colouration between and within species, often sexually dichromatic (otherwise rare in anurans), and with remarkably conservative morphology13. It is a genus inhabiting wide range of habitats from open savannas and bushland to closed-canopy rain forests13. One of the rain forest dwelling species is the little-known Hyperolius robustus Laurent, 1979 (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. S1). It was described from a handful of localities in the central Congo Basin, Sankuru region of the present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)14. Since the description, this species has only been reported by one author13,15, and only scarce biological data exist.
Hyperolius robustus—now in the new genus Congolius—and its distribution. (a) All known localities lie to the south of the wide arc of the Congo River (left bank), within the Democratic Republic of the Congo; star denotes type locality. Photographs of (b) adult male (IVB-H-CD18-143) and (c) adult female (NMP-P6V 76087/2) from the Kokolopori Bonobo Nature Reserve. Photos by V.G.
Hyperolius robustus is one of the larger species in the genus, with both sexes reaching up to 37–38 mm in body length13,15. Dark yellow to brown dorsum with varying intensity of dark spots in males differs from a reddish-brown dorsal colouration in females (Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary S2). Males bear large flat gular gland (disc, flap) of yellowish to white colour. The venter is coloured yellow in males and orange in females, especially limbs. Hyperolius robustus can be distinguished from its sympatric congeners by proportions of the head, especially relatively longer snout and closely-positioned nostrils. It resembles members of the H. concolor species group, specifically H. balfouri (Werner, 1908), H. cinnamomeoventris Bocage, 1866, or H. kivuensis Ahl, 1931 when compared to the species widespread across the Congo14. While Laurent14 suggested its probable relationship to the H. concolor group, he also noted that some of its morphological characters supported a possible close relationship to Cryptothylax, a genus superficially also resembling the H. concolor group, although reaching a larger adult size14. A later publication focusing more broadly on external morphology of Hyperolius gained an additional support for the similarity of H. robustus to H. balfouri and H. cinnamomeoventris16.
Recently, we collected new specimens of H. robustus at multiple sites in the central Congolian forests, and reviewed available museum material, including types (Supplementary Table S1, Appendices S1 and S2). This study aims to (1) clarify the phylogenetic and systematic position of Hyperolius robustus using a molecular multilocus approach, and (2) evaluate morphological variation based on morphometric and osteological approaches in a comparative framework.
The phylogenetic analysis of the complete concatenated data set of four nuclear and one mitochondrial marker places H. robustus well outside the clade containing the genus Hyperolius (Fig. 2), rendering Hyperolius paraphyletic. The tree based on this complete concatenated data set has only minor difference in the topology compared to the tree based on the nuclear-only data set (Supplementary Fig. S3f). However, support values are lower in the complete data set. All phylogenetic inferences of individual markers or concatenated data put the taxa from the subfamily Hyperoliinae into a common clade, with variable support values depending on a molecular marker/data set. General topology within Hyperoliinae is also consistent across the markers/data sets (except of the mitochondrial tree, which has a lower resolution; Supplementary Fig. S3a). Opisthothylax is positioned as a basal genus in the subfamily Hyperoliinae and in the sister position to all other available Hyperoliinae genera forming three main clades (hereafter Clades A–C). Hyperolius robustus together with Cryptothylax and Morerella form the well-supported Clade B (received the full support in the complete and nuclear-only concatenated data sets), which is in the sister position to Clade A containing the remaining Hyperolius. The relationships within Clade B are uncertain but the sister relationship between H. robustus and Morerella received a full support in the nuclear-only data set. Clade A (Hyperolius sensu stricto) is a well-supported clade composed of three sub-clades. One subclade contains H. adspersus and H. pusillus (= H. nasutus complex15), and is in the sister position to the remaining two subclades. Another subclade (Clade 2 sensu Portik et al.1) is represented by H. balfouri and H. cf. cinnamomeoventris (an unresolved species complex of multiple distinct lineages17; hereafter as H. cinnamomeoventris) and is in the well-supported sister position to the third clade (Clade 1 sensu Portik et al.1), which includes H. phantasticus and H. tuberculatus (a similar case as the H. cinnamomeoventris species complex17; hereafter as H. tuberculatus). The third main clade, the well-supported Clade C contains Afrixalus from sub-Saharan Africa, Heterixalus from Madagascar, and Tachycnemis from Seychelles. Support values for the relationships within the subfamily Hyperoliinae (ingroup), among the three main Clades A–C, differ depending on a particular ML and BI analysis (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. S3). However, all these analyses provide a strong support for the position of H. robustus outside of the genus Hyperolius. All nuclear markers, including the concatenated data set, place H. robustus into a common clade with Cryptothylax and Morerella, with three of the four nuclear markers (and the nuclear concatenated data set) supporting the sister relationship of H. robustus and Morerella with an intermediate to high support (only one marker infers the sister relationship between Cryptothylax and Morerella with an intermediate support). The phylogenetic analysis of the relatively short 16S mitochondrial marker places H. robustus in the sister position to Opisthothylax, but with a low support.
Phylogenetic tree of hyperoliid frogs with a focus on the subfamily Hyperoliinae. The majority rule consensus tree inferred from Bayesian analyses of four nuclear and one mitochondrial marker (complete data set). Dots at nodes represent high supports (ML bootstrap ≥ 70/Bayesian posterior probability ≥ 0.95) while numbers show support values for nodes with a lower support. Sequence GenBank accession numbers are provided in Supplementary Table S1.
The species-tree analysis yielded a tree with a similar topology as the conventional phylogenetic analyses (Fig. 3). Opisthothylax is placed with a high support in a basal position within the Hyperoliinae subfamily and its lineage diverged at approx. 40.8 Mya (± 5.5) in the middle Eocene. Similarly to the conventional phylogenetic analyses, all three main Clades A–C are well supported but their mutual relationships are not resolved. The diversification into the three main clades occurred during the Eocene–Oligocene transition (approx. 28–39 Mya, mean 33.4 Mya). Clade B received the full support, and—as in a majority of the conventional phylogenetic inferences—H. robustus is placed in the sister relationship to Morerella, albeit without a high support. The diversification within Clade B is dated in the early Miocene (21.2 ± 4.9 Mya), with the split between H. robustus and Morerella inferred at around 17.3 Mya (± 7.2). Clade A (the remaining Hyperolius) is also well supported, forming three subclades, but the sister relationship between the balfouri–cinnamomeoventris and phantasticus–tuberculatus subclades lacks a higher support (contrary to the conventional analyses). The initial radiation of the remaining studied Hyperolius began at around 21.5 Mya (± 3.7) in the early Miocene. The well-supported Clade C containing Afrixalus, Heterixalus, and Tachycnemis diversified approx. 22.8 Mya (± 5.1) in the early Miocene. The sister relationship of the two included Afrixalus species received only a weaker support, with the divergence dated to 17.8 Mya (± 8.6) in the Miocene. In fact, one of the Afrixalus species (A. enseticola) probably represents a distinct genus1. The youngest divergence between valid genera of Hyperoliinae was found between Heterixalus and Tachycnemis dated to11.5 Mya (± 5.8) in the late to middle Miocene.
Time-calibrated species tree of the subfamily Hyperoliinae. Maximum clade credibility tree based on StarBEAST2 analysis of four nuclear markers with geological epochs as a time scale (abbreviation P stands for Pliocene and Q for Quaternary). Dots at nodes signify high supports (Bayesian posterior probability ≥ 0.95), median node ages are shown to the right from each node, lower support values are shown to the left of the relevant node. Leptopelis (Arthroleptidae) is outgroup. Photos on the right side from top to bottom (not to scale): Hyperolius cinnamomeoventris, H. phantasticus, Cryptothylax greshoffii (in a calling position; note the extensive gular gland and missing vocal sac), H. robustus (now Congolius robustus gen. et comb. n.), Morerella cyanophthalma. Photos by V.G. and T. F. Kpan (Morerella cyanophthalma).
Hereafter, we describe a new genus for H. robustus to remove the uncovered paraphyly of Hyperolius. To justify its genus level distinction, beside its specific morphological characters (see below), we refer to the deeper phylogenetic divergence than is found between Heterixalus from Madagascar and Tachycnemis from Seychelles, and a comparable divergence between Afrixalus (A. fornasini is type species of the genus) and a candidate, yet undescribed genus containing “Afrixalus” enseticola1.
Family Hyperoliidae Laurent, 1943.
Subfamily Hyperoliinae Laurent, 1943.
Congolius  genus novum Nečas, Badjedjea & Gvoždík.
ZooBank registration: urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7C7D57F2-3D02-4456–9292-184A98A559E6.
Type species: Hyperolius robustus Laurent, 1979.
Suggested English name: Congo Frog.
Content: Congolius robustus (Laurent, 1979) combinatio nova (formerly Hyperolius robustus), Robust Congo Frog. Presently a monotypic genus.
The generic name Congolius is of the masculine gender and it is a compound of the name Congo, referring to the region where the genus is endemic to, and the Greek word eleios = smooth in the Latinized form as the suffix –lius, which is used in the genus name Hyperolius to refer to its former affiliation of Congolius robustus to this genus.
The new genus Congolius can be distinguished from other genera within the family Hyperoliidae by following characters: pupil horizontal (vertical or rhomboidal in Acanthixalus, Afrixalus, Arlequinus, Cryptothylax, Heterixalus, Kassina, Kassinula, Tachycnemis, Opisthothylax, Paracassina, Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus; predominately horizontal but sometimes rhomboidal in Morerella, see photos in18); tympanum indistinct but visible in both sexes (indistinct in Acanthixalus, Callixalus, Chrysobatrachus, Heterixalus, Kassinula, Opisthothylax, and in most Hyperolius and Afrixalus); males with large gular gland with free lateral and posterior margins without free skin folds of dilatable skin beneath, Fig. 4c [gular gland present in males of all hyperoliid species; paired, laterally positioned in Acanthixalus; large without free margins obscuring whole gular region in Cryptothylax (Fig. 4e); positioned anteromedially and hidden under semi-transparent integument in Alexteroon; transverse in Arlequinus; rather indistinct transverse oval composed of two elements fused medially in Callixalus (Fig. 4k); distinct round composed of two elements fused medially in Chrysobatrachus (Fig. 4j); in a form of round median disc without extended dilatable skin beneath or around present in Morerella (Fig. 4d), Opisthothylax (Fig. 4m) and Tachycnemis; medioposteriorly positioned with free skin folds beneath the posterior margin in Afrixalus (Fig. 4l), Heterixalus, and most Hyperolius (Fig. 4f–i; exceptions exist in Hyperolius, e.g. H. zonatus Laurent, 1958 from West Africa;12); longitudinal oval or strap-shaped with free lateral margins in Kassina; round with free lateral margins in Paracassina, Phlyctimantis (Fig. 4n), and Semnodactylus]; dilatable vocal sac (pouch) present, when inflated forms a hemisphere extending to the pectoral region, Fig. 4a (extensively dilatable vocal sac absent in Arlequinus, Acanthixalus, Callixalus, Chrysobatrachus, Cryptothylax, and Morerella; see Fig. 4b for comparison with inflated vocal sac of Hyperolius balfouri); limbs without skin “fringes” (present in Alexteroon); dorsal skin slightly granular in both sexes (tuberculous in Acanthixalus); sexually dichromatic (colouration difference between sexes similar to Cryptothylax and Morerella, where females display more orange to reddish colouration than males, see Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary Fig. S2; sexually monochromatic genera: Acanthixalus, Afrixalus, Alexteroon, Arlequinus, Callixalus, Chrysobatrachus, some Heterixalus, some Hyperolius, Kassina, Kassinula, Opisthothylax, Paracassina, Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus).
Gular region of selected hyperoliid taxa. (a) Congolius robustus gen. et comb. n. (IVB-H-CD18-255) with inflated vocal sac, (b) Hyperolius balfouri (IVB-H-CD15-062) with inflated vocal sac, (c) C. robustus gen. et comb. n. (ZMUC-R.771175), (d) Morerella cyanophthalma (ZMB 71588, paratype), (e) Cryptothylax greshoffii (NMP-P6V 76076/1), (f) H. balfouri (IVB-H-CD15-061), (g) H. cf. cinnamomeoventris (IVB-H-CD18-092), (h) H. phantasticus (IVB-H-CD18-203), (i) H. cf. adspersus (IVB-H-CD15-139), (j) Chrysobatrachus cupreonitens (MCZ A-64739, paratype), (k) Callixalus pictus (MCZ A-64707), (l) Afrixalus equatorialis (NMP-P6V 76073/1), (m) Opisthothylax immaculatus (NMP-P6V 76090/1), (n) Phlyctimantis verrucosus (NMP-P6V 76085/1). Photos by (a,b,j,k) V.G., (c,e–i,l–n) T.N. and (d) F. Tillack and M.-O. Rödel.
Osteologically, Congolius is characterized with sphenethmoid not dorsally exposed (dorsally visible in Cryptothylax, some Hyperolius, Kassina, Kassinula, Phlyctimantis, Semnodactylus, and Tachycnemis); ventroanterior portion of sphenethmoid unfused (fused in some Kassina, Paracassina, some Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus); praemaxilla and maxilla bear minute teeth; overlapping of praemaxilla and maxilla is minimal; nasals triangular, separated medially from each other and posteriorly from frontoparietals; canthal regions of nasals rounded; vomers lack teeth-bearing dentigerous processes, “vomerine teeth” (present in Cryptothylax, most Kassina, and Phlyctimantis); frontoparietals rectangular; quadratojugal anteriorly in contact with maxilla (not in contact with maxilla in Acanthixalus, some Afrixalus, Callixalus, Chrysobatrachus, some Heterixalus, some Hyperolius, some Kassina, and Kassinula; reduced or absent in some Afrixalus); columella present (reduced in Callixalus); neural arches non-imbricate (imbricate in Cryptothylax, Kassina, Paracassina, Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus); transverse processes of 8th vertebra angled perpendicularly to vertebral column (angled markedly forward in some Afrixalus, some Hyperolius, some Kassina, Kassinula, Opisthothylax, and Semnodactylus); relative length of vertebral column (ratio of length of vertebral column to transverse processes of 8th presacral vertebra) between values of 1.6 and 2.4 (longer vertebral column in Afrixalus, Callixalus, some Heterixalus, some Hyperolius, Kassina, Kassinula, Paracassina, Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus); medial margins of coracoids entire (centrally perforated in Kassinula, and Paracassina); omosternum greatly forked (unforked or less forked in Callixalus, some Hyperolius, and Paracassina); base of metasternum ossified (completely ossified in Morerella); carpal and tarsal bones not fused (Hyperoliidae synapomorphy); subarticular sesamoids absent (present in Kassina, Paracassina, some Phlyctimantis, and Semnodactylus); intercalary elements completely mineralized (cartilaginous centres in Afrixalus, Callixalus, Heterixalus, and Hyperolius); terminal phalanges long and peniform (long and claw-shaped in some Heterixalus, some Hyperolius, some Kassina, Kassinula, and Opisthothylax; short obtuse in some Kassina, Paracassina, and Phlyctimantis; bifurcated in Acanthixalus, some Kassina, and possibly Arlequinus based on external morphology, no osteological data for the latter). Osteological terminology follows Drewes8. See Supplementary Appendix S3 for literature resources.
Genetically, Congolius is differentiated, forms a clade with Cryptothylax and Morerella, and differs from other genera in the family Hyperoliidae by an uncorrected p-distance larger than 11.0% in the fragment of 16S rRNA (Supplementary Table S2).
Congolius robustus is probably endemic to the central Congolian lowland forests, to the south of the wide arc of the Congo River (Fig. 1a). It has never been recorded from the right bank of the Congo River. For locality details, see Supplementary Appendix S2. It occupies occasionally flooded forests and dense farmbush along small streams. Congolius robustus has a nocturnal activity, and it can typically be found perching on vegetation 1.5–2 m high.
This publication and the nomenclatural act are registered in ZooBank, the online Official Register of Zoological Nomenclature. The LSID (Life Science Identifier) of this publication from ZooBank is urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:F2045C29-D703-4FC8-B317-1BFD09815E15 and can be accessed at https://zoobank.org/.
Body size of the six investigated taxa as average snout-vent length (SVL ± SD; in mm) in adult males is: Congolius robustus (32.5 ± 0.9), Cryptothylax greshoffii (45.2 ± 2.1), Hyperolius balfouri (29.4 ± 3.2), H. cinnamomeoventris (27.8 ± 1.0), H. phantasticus (32.0 ± 1.1), H. tuberculatus (24.4 ± 1.0) (Fig. 5b). Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to evaluate body shape variation of the above-mentioned taxa. Factor loadings for the first three principal components (PCs) and most contributing variables are provided in Supplementary Table S3. The body shapes of the six taxa were found significantly different using MANOVA (F5,15 = 57.07, p =  < 2.2e−16). The PC1 (31.7% of explained variation) can be interpreted as showing mostly the shape of head, especially snout. The PC2 (20.3%) was influenced mostly by the head width and variables characterizing the length of limbs. The PCA (Fig. 5a) placed Congolius along the PC1 axis between Cryptothylax and the four Hyperolius species in close proximity to H. cinnamomeoventris. The PC2 does not differentiate Congolius and Cryptothylax from representatives of Hyperolius, but differences among the species of the latter genus are apparent. The studied taxa are well separated from each other in the morphospace (PC1 x PC2), except of small overlaps of H. cinnamomeoventris with Congolius and H. balfouri putting the three taxa into a common cluster. The main distinguishing morphometric characters between Congolius and Hyperolius are the characters related to the shape of snout: eye-nostril distance (measured along body axis) is usually larger than internarial distance in Congolius (as well as Cryptothylax), and on average the same or smaller in the studied Hyperolius. The snout shape of the representatives of Clade 2 (H. balfouri, H. cinnamomeoventris) is more similar to Congolius than the snout shape of the representatives of Clade 1 (H. phantasticus, H. tuberculatus) (clades sensu Portik et al.1; Fig. 5c).
Morphometric analyses of external characters of Congolius gen. n. and relative (Cryptothylax) or similar (Hyperolius) genera from the lowland Congo Basin. Four Hyperolius species represent two phylogenetic clades (see Methods for details). (a) Principal component analysis of body shape, (b) variation of SVL as boxplots, (c) variation of the ENL/IND ratio as boxplots. Boxplots display average values (line), upper and lower quartiles (box), minimums and maximums without outliers (whiskers), and outliers (dots). Cg (Cryptothylax greshoffii), Cr (Congolius robustus gen. et comb. n.), Hb (Hyperolius balfouri), Hc (H. cinnamomeoventris), Hp (H. phantasticus), and Ht (H. tuberculatus).
Larval morphology is not presently known.
Skeletons with a special focus on skulls were studied in Congolius, its relative Cryptothylax, Hyperolius, two little-known genera Chrysobatrachus and Callixalus, and Acanthixalus. All are distributed in the Congo Basin, and thus of a systematic importance in respect to our erection of the new genus. Scans of skulls are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, for a female of C. robustus see Supplementary Figs. S4, S6. No differences were found in the osteological characters between male and female C. robustus. Our new osteological data were used in addition to the previously published8 for genus-level comparisons (see “Diagnosis and comparisons”). A special focus on the little-known genera distributed in the Congo uncovered that the skeletons of Acanthixalus, Chrysobatrachus and Callixalus exhibited number of characters clearly differentiating them from the new genus Congolius: bifurcated phalanges, and flat frontoparietals in Acanthixalus; moderately forked omosternum in Callixalus; reduced nasals in Callixalus and Chrysobatrachus; cartilaginous metasternum, and short and tall skull in Chrysobatrachus [8] (this study).
Cranial morphology of Chrysobatrachus, Callixalus, and Acanthixalus. Reconstructions in dorsal, frontal, and lateral views are based on high-resolution X-ray microcomputed tomography. From left to right: Chrysobatrachus cupreonitens (CAS 145263, male), Callixalus pictus (CAS 145260, male), and Acanthixalus spinosus (CAS 153800, female). Skull views are scaled to a similar size among the three genera.
Cranial morphology and shapes in a morphospace of Congolius gen. n. and relative (Cryptothylax) or similar (Hyperolius) genera from the lowland Congo Basin. The morphospace is expressed by a principal component analysis of geometric morphometric landmarks. Cg (Cryptothylax greshoffii, IVB-H-CD15-169, male), Cr (Congolius robustus gen. et comb. n., ZMUC-R.771175, male), Hb (Hyperolius balfouri, IVB-H-CD15-061, male), and Ht (H. tuberculatus, IVB-H-CD15-010, male). Reconstructions in dorsal, frontal, and lateral views are based on high-resolution X-ray microcomputed tomography. Skull views are scaled to a similar size among the four taxa. See Supplementary Fig. S4 for comparison of all scanned specimens.
Cranial data of Congolius and the remaining examined taxa, relative (Cryptothylax) or similar (Hyperolius) genera, were examined using the 3D geometric morphometrics. PCA generated two relevant PCs (Fig. 7), while the third contributed only 0.06% of the explained variation. PCA scores of the four analysed taxa are in Supplementary Table S4. The PC1 (65.1%) axis could be explained as a change of the cranial shape from rounded (negative PC1 values) to more triangular (positive PC1 values) from the dorsoventral view, including a shift of the mandibular joint to more posterior position or an elongation of frontoparietals and nasals (Fig. 7). Congolius lays in a close proximity to H. balfouri, while H. tuberculatus and Cryptothylax are positioned more distantly in different directions. The PC2 (28.5%) axis explains a change in the shape from a rather prolonged skull (negative PC2 values) to a wider skull (positive PC2 values). The examined taxa are clustered into two groups along the PC2 axis, Congolius and H. balfouri (negative PC2 scores), and Cryptothylax and H. tuberculatus (positive PC2 scores).
The phylogenetic analyses confirmed our initial finding that “Hyperolius robustus”, now Congolius robustus, is phylogenetically placed outside of Hyperolius, as well as Laurent’s14 hypothesis of the possible relationship to Cryptothylax greshoffii. These two Central African taxa and Morerella cyanophthalma from West Africa form a common clade (Clade B), which is in the sister relationship to Hyperolius (Clade A, Figs. 2, 3). According to our results, the West African monotypic genus Morerella is the closest relative to Congolius diverging around 17 Mya (Figs. 2, 3). However, the sister relationship of the two genera is not always highly supported. For example, the analysis of the all-markers data set shows only a medium support for this relationship (Fig. 2). However, this could be caused by the implementation of the 16S mitochondrial marker, which is not optimal for deeper phylogenies due to saturated substitutions (see also Supplementary Fig. S3a). The phylogenetic analysis of the nuclear-markers data set gives to the Congolius–Morerella clade a high support (Supplementary Fig. S3f). A close relationship of Congolius and Morerella is further suggested by their similar superficial morphology as well as osteological characters. In particular, these two genera share a similar expression of sexual dichromatism (males brownish, females reddish), the general morphology of the gular region (lack of visible extended dilatable skin beneath or around gular gland), and the general osteological composition (the only main difference is in the degree of metasternum ossification).
The general topology of our phylogenetic reconstruction of the subfamily Hyperoliinae corresponds to the results of a recent phylogenomic study1. The only exception is “Afrixalus” enseticola, which is not in our results placed in the same clade with the genera Heterixalus and Tachycnemis1, but shares a clade with A. fornasini (type species of the genus). However, the divergence is relatively deep and the support only intermediate (Figs. 2, 3, Supplementary Fig. S3f.). The diversification into the three major clades in the subfamily Hyperoliinae (Clades A–C) took place during the Eocene–Oligocene transition (around 33 Mya). The Eocene–Oligocene boundary is associated with an extinction event on Earth19,20,21. This event is attributed to a rapid decrease in the global temperature caused mainly by the opening of the southern oceanic gateway, Earth orbital cycles, and a decrease of the atmospheric CO2 levels22,23,24,25,26. Most notably on the African continent, it was the accompanying aridification23,27. Our analyses lack a higher support in resolving the relationships among the three main clades, which suggests consecutive divergences in a short period of time. Such extinctions as at the Eocene–Oligocene transition might have opened previously occupied niches and could have led to radiations in vacant places in the ecosystem. The radiation within the clade B, which contains Congolius, is estimated to occur at around 21–17 Mya (Fig. 3). Similar ages were estimated for the radiations of Clades A and C occurring in the early Miocene (approx. 23–18 Mya). The Miocene is a geological epoch connected to yet another event of rapid global cooling at the Oligocene–Miocene transition (23 Mya)23,28. Although periods of the late Oligocene and the first half of Miocene were relatively warm (26 to 15 Mya)23, the mid-Miocene’s closure of the Tethys Ocean and continual northward drift of the African continent had major aridification effects23,28. Both events led to the reduction of the rainforest cover to refugia along coasts and major rivers by the late Miocene27. The rainforest withdrawal and fragmentation could have been a driver for the divergence in a common ancestor of Central African Congolius and West African Morerella occurring at approximately 17 Mya.
Representatives of the little-known genera Callixalus and Chrysobatrachus were not available for the molecular analyses. However, they were morphologically examined to compare with Congolius, including osteology (Fig. 6). Both genera, together with Acanthixalus from Kassininae, were found to have distinct morphological characters from the newly established genus (e.g., maxilla not in contact with quadratojugal). A possible close relationship of Acanthixalus and Callixalus was suggested earlier8,9 based on thorough morphological analyses. While a recent phylogenomic study placed Acanthixalus in Kassininae1, the monotypic genus Callixalus has conservatively remained in Hyperoliinae1,2, awaiting a focused study. Callixalus has not been recorded since its description in 1950 and hence, no recent genetic material is available. Our examination of Callixalus and Acanthixalus supports their similarity in a number of shared characters. However, we refrain from making systematic conclusions for these two genera, as our study was not designed to solve this question. A future research on the phylogenetic position of Callixalus, as well as Chrysobatrachus (rediscovered in 201129), Alexteroon (revision of the genus is in preparation30), Arlequinus, and Kassinula is needed to reveal a complete genus-level phylogenetic reconstruction of Hyperoliidae.
The distribution range of C. robustus seems to be confined to the central Congolian forests, south of the wide arc of the Congo River. Several recent surveys did not report any sightings of C. robustus on the right bank of the Congo River31,32,33,34,35. Therefore, the Congo River may represent a barrier that prevents C. robustus from reaching the northern parts of the Congo Basin. In contrast, the Congo River does not seem to be a dispersal barrier for some Hyperolius species17. The barrier for Congolius to the east could be either the Lualaba River (= upper part of the Congo River) or the Lomami River which flows in parallel to the west. Future herpetological field research in the Lomami National Park, which lies between these two rivers, could bring an answer to this question.
Morphologically, C. robustus is highly resembling some Hyperolius species, in particular from the H. concolor group14. The morphometric analyses of external characters and the body shape showed a great similarity between phylogenetically rather distant taxa (Fig. 5). The main distinguishing morphological character is the shape of snout, being longer than wide in Cryptothylax and Congolius compared to Hyperolius. Although some specimens of H. balfouri and H. cinnamomeoventris reach similar values of the ENL/IND ratio (Fig. 5c). Our results generally support the findings of Laurent14,16, who already pointed out on the similarity of Congolius and these two species from the H. concolor group. The analysis of the shape of skull yielded very similar results. It put Congolius more closely to phylogenetically more distant H. balfouri than to a close relative, Cryptothylax greshoffii.
There are two evolutionary processes that could be responsible for the origin of the morphological similarity between the newly erected Congolius and some Hyperolius species. First is the morphological stasis, which postulates tendency of some lineages to retain ancestral ecological niches, and thus, to reduce the morphological change during an evolutionary lineage’s existence36,37. This hypothesis would suggests that Congolius and some lineages of Hyperolius may have retained the same general body shape as possessed by their common ancestor, i.e. since the beginning of the Oligocene (approx. 32 Mya; our dating corresponds to a previously published study1). Second is the convergent evolution, which evolves when the same or similar selection pressures cause independent development of analogous characters in unrelated taxa38,39,40. Convergent evolution is a common characteristic feature in species-rich communities, like are typically present in rain forests. An independent parallel evolution of a similar body shape in Congolius and some Hyperolius could have been driven by similar ecological pressures across the African rain forests. However, further investigations into causalities of ecological factors and the phenotypic evolution of African reed frogs are needed to understand processes leading to the morphological uniformity of some unrelated hyperoliid taxa.
