Predictors and complications of side branch occlusion after recanalization of chronic total occlusions complicated with bifurcation lesions
Data on risk factors and periprocedural complications associated with side branch (SB) occlusion after chronic coronary total occlusion (CTO) recanalization are limited. The aims of this study were to identify independent predictors of side branch (SB) occlusion after chronic total occlusion (CTO) recanalization and assess the relationship between SB occlusion and perioperative complications. 245 patients with CTO bifurcation lesions (BFLs) who underwent successful CTO recanalization were included in the study. In the occlusion group, most of the SB occlusions were observed after the implantation of the stents and lack of SB protection was more common. However, there was no significant between-group difference in the angles between the main vessel (MV) and SB. SB occlusion was associated with a higher risk of periprocedural myocardial infarction and a higher composite periprocedural complication rate. Identified as predictors of SB occlusion were no SB protection, use of a dissection-reentry strategy, ostial SB stenosis, and proximal MV stenosis of 50% or more.
The incidence of side branch (SB) occlusion occurs in 4.5–26% in non-occluded coronary arteries when performing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and associated with a higher risk of periprocedural myocardial infarction (PMI)1,2,3,4. The presence of SB in the context of chronic coronary total occlusion (CTO) can increase the complexity of the recanalization procedure. SB occurs in 25.8–47% during CTO PCI5,6,7,8. However, there are few reports on the predictors and complications of SB occlusion associated with CTO recanalization. The aims of this study were to identify risk factors for SB occlusion, examine the SB protection strategy and assess the relationship between SB occlusion and perioperative complications.
A total of 675 patients were screened for enrollment. After confirming successful CTO recanalization, 245 (36.3%) patients with CTO BFLs were finally included in the study. The patients were divided into an occlusion group (TIMI flow grade less than 3 in SB, n = 21) and a non-occlusion group (TIMI flow grade of 3 in SB, n = 224). The baseline clinical characteristics are reported in Table 1. There was no between-group difference in the distribution of cardiovascular risk factors, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or previous myocardial infarction, PCI, or CABG.
There was no between-group difference in target vessel CTO, J-CTO score, or number of vessels involved (Table 2). However, in the occlusion group, the SB reference diameter was smaller (2.2 ± 0.2 mm vs 2.4 ± 0.4 mm; P = 0.038; Table 2). There was a significant difference in the MV reference diameter between the occlusion group and non-occlusion group (3.2 ± 0.4 mm vs 2.9 ± 0.4 mm; P = 0.017). Quantitative coronary data showed more ostial SB stenosis in the occlusion group (47.1% vs 32.1%; P = 0.017).
The procedural characteristics are summarized in Table 3. Arterial access was categorized as either a fully transradial approach (fTRA) or transfemoral access (TFA). More procedures were performed via TFA in the occlusion group (52.4% vs 29.9%; P = 0.035). A retrograde technique was also used more often in the occlusion group (33.3% vs 7.1%; P = 0.001). The SB was not protected in 158 patients (64.5%), a jailed wire was used in 44 (18%), an SB pre-dilation technique in 31 (12.7%), and a two-stent technique in 12 (4.9%). The number of SB which was protected with a guidewire before MV stent implantation was 87 (35.5%), and the number of SB not protected was 158 (64.5%). In this study, only a very small number of patients (7.3%) used dual-lumen microcatheter. And there was no significant difference in the proportion of using dual-lumen microcatheters between the occlusion group and non-occlusion group (14.3% vs 6.7%, P = 0.191). No SB protection was found to be more common in the occlusion group (85.7% vs 62.5%; P = 0.034). In the branch unprotected group, SB occlusion occurred in 18 (11.4%) patients. However, in the branch protection group, only 3 cases (3.4%) had SB occlusion. There were no significant between-group differences in the angles between the MV and SB. In the Occlusion group, most of the SB occlusions (71.4%) were observed after the implantation of the stents. In this study, after the implantation of stent in MV, 15 cases occured branch occlusion. And only 5 patients (33.3%) successfully rewired to the SB and completed post dilation.
Periprocedural complications were observed in 30 patients (12.2%) in the study. The composite procedural complication rate was 33.3% (7/21) in the occlusion group and 10.3% (23/224) in the non-occlusion group (P = 0.007). The incidence of PMI was also higher in the occlusion group (19.0% vs 5.4%; P = 0.037). In this group, 2 patients (9.5%) had major bleeding and 1 (4.8%) had CIN. In the non-occlusion group, 4 (1.8%) patients had major bleeding and 2 (0.9%) developed CIN (Table 4). There was no significant between-group difference in the perforation rate. No instances of emergency CABG or death were ascertained.
Univariable logistic regression analysis was performed for all potentially important clinical and angiographic variables. Factors associated with occlusion of SB included previous PCI, length of occlusion, MV reference diameter, SB reference diameter, no SB protection, 50% or more ostial SB stenosis ,50% or more proximal MV stenosis, and a dissection-reentry strategy were P < 0.10. These variables were included in the multivariable model. On multivariate analysis, no SB protection (odds ratio[OR] 4.61, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.25–17.04; P = 0.022), 50% or more ostial SB stenosis (OR 5.37, 95% CI 1.93–14.98; P = 0.001), 50% or more proximal MV stenosis (OR 2.93, 95% CI 1.01–8.49; P = 0.047) and use of a dissection-reentry strategy (OR 4.25, 95% CI 1.29–13.99; P = 0.017) were independent predictors of SB occlusion (Table 5).
The incidence of BFLs in non-occluded coronary arteries during PCI and their treatment have been widely reported9,10. Although there have been several studies of BFLs involved in the CTO recanalization procedure, they have major limitations. For example, the definition of the diameter of the SB was too restrictive (as low as 1.0 mm) to evaluate the influence of these factors on clinical outcomes and sample sizes were too limited to be able to draw definitive conclusions11,12. Moreover, the final vessel size, BFLs site, and bifurcation results were only assessed visually, which might have introduced some degree of measurement bias5. Therefore, we sought to identify the incidence, protective strategy used, and predictors of SB occlusion and found the following: (1) 36.3% of recanalized CTO lesions had BFLs; (2) no SB protection, use of a dissection-reentry strategy, and 50% or more ostial SB and proximal MV stenosis predicted SB occlusion; (3) SB occlusion during PCI of CTO was associated with a higher incidence of PMI and most of the SB occlusion (71.4%) were found after the implantation of the stents; and (4) there were no significant between-group differences in the bifurcation angles.
Conventional antegrade wire escalation is reportedly as the most commonly used CTO crossing technique (in 67–77% of cases)13,14, especially for less complex occlusions. However, a conventional approach is unsuitable for long, calcified, and tortuous occlusions. In the last decade, there has been a marked increase in the use of the dissection-reentry strategy for PCI of CTO with reported CTO recanalization rates of more than 80%15,16,17. Dissection-reentry techniques involve crossing the occlusion in the subintimal space followed by reentry into the true lumen using a guidewire or dedicated system. However, this technique involves extensive dissection and intramural hematoma with compression of ostial SB and results in loss of SB. Furthermore, implantation of a stent in the subintimal space often leads to SB occlusion (Fig. 1). In our study, use of a dissection-reentry technique (antegrade or retrograde) was an independent predictor of SB occlusion (OR 4.25; 95% CI 1.29–13.99; P = 0.017) and SB occlusion was more common (71.4%) after stent implantation in occlusion group. A further development in this field is the advent of devices specifically designed to limit the extent of dissection and minimize vessel trauma, thereby preserving the SB (for example, use of special reentry devices, such as the CrossBoss-Stingray system or the guideliner reverse controlled antegrade and retrograde subintimal tracking)18,19.
SB was obstructed during recanalization of CTO using RDR technique A CTO in the left anterior descending artery with a significant diagonal branch in the proximal cap. (B) Distal filling by contralateral collaterals from the right coronary artery. (C) Retrograde approach through a septal channel. (D) RDR technique crossed to the true lumen. (E) Balloon dilation of the main vessel without SB protection. (F) After implantation of the main vessel stents, the SB was obstructed with TIMI flow grade 1. CTO, chronic total occlusion; RDR, retrograde dissection and reentry; SB, side branch.
Current research indicates that provisional strategy is currently the most commonly used method for BFLs in non-CTO9. However, SB occlusion is one of the most serious complication during PCI, and may even lead to PMI and cardiac death. Furthermore, intervention strategy, operation techniques and predictors of SB occlusion are very limited in the case of CTO complicated with bifurcations. Dissection and hematoma are the most important causes of SB occlusion after CTO PCI. In this study provisional T strategy with unprotected branch is the most commonly used strategy (64.5%).
Multivariable logistic results showed no SB protection was an independent predictor of SB occlusion (OR 4.61; 95%CI 1.25–17.04, P = 0.022). Significant SB near to the proximal cap should be wired prior to CTO crossing attempts to minimize the risk of occlusion, especially when dissection-reentry is used. Even if the branch is blocked, a jailed guidewire in the SB is helpful for rewiring after stenting the MV20. Furthermore, SB pre-dilation was helpful to prevent SB occlusion and re-cross after stent implantation in the MV. In addition, dilation of both the SB balloon and the MV stent balloon at the same time can prevent plaque removal and carina shift21,22. After balloon dilation of the SB, if the result is unsatisfactory, a two-stent strategy, such as the T-technique, culotte, or reverse crush, can be selected. Therefore, we encourage routine wiring in the SB when BFLs were treated with the provisional strategy.
It had been shown that SB can be affected during PCI as a result of snowplowing of plaque over the SB ostium, that is, plaque shift, especially in bifurcations with a small SB angle. Furthermore, SB obstruction after MV stenting might also be due to carina shift. In this study, more than 50% stenosis of the proximal MV was one of the independent predictors of SB occlusion (OR 2.93; 95% CI 1.01–8.49, P = 0.047). A study that used intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) demonstrated that proximal MV stenosis, but not distal MV stenosis, was an independent predictor of SB occlusion in conventional BFLs23.
In our study, 50% or more ostial SB stenosis was one of the independent predictors of SB occlusion in CTO recanalization, consistent with previous research in regular bifurcations. The earlier study demonstrated that the presence and severity of ostial SB plaque observed by IVUS is an independent predictor of SB occlusion after bifurcation PCI23.
Whether the angle between the MV and SB is a risk factor for SB occlusion is controversial. Previous researchers have shown a narrow bifurcation angle to be a predictor of SB occlusion during MB stenting and that carina shift will occur if the bifurcation angle is less than 90° when full MB dilation is performed24. In contrast, the COBISII study showed that the bifurcation angle did not influence the final TIMI flow grade in the SB or long-term clinical outcomes after PCI for non-CTO9. In our present study, we investigated the relationship between three angles (those for the proximal MV and SB, distal MV and SB, and proximal MV and distal MV) and SB occlusion after successful CTO recanalization. We found no significant difference in any of these angles between the occlusion and non-occlusion groups. Furthermore, none of these angles was an independent predictor of SB occlusion. Expansion of dissection and vessel trauma were the important causes of SB occlusion after PCI for CTO and might have attenuated the effect of the bifurcation angle.
PCI is associated with a higher procedural complication rate and a lower success rate when performed for CTO than for non-CTO. Furthermore, the presence of bifurcation is associated with a higher risk of PMI25. In the present study, the overall procedural complication rate was 12.2% (30/245). The more common events were PMI (6.5%), major bleeding (2.4%), perforation (2.0%), and CIN (1.2%). The composite periprocedural complication rate was higher in the occlusion group (33.3% vs 10.3%, P = 0.007). The main reason for this difference was a higher incidence of PMI (19.0% vs 5.4%; P = 0.037). SB obstruction has been reported to increase the risk of PMI, especially when the stent is implanted in the MV and when a dissection-reentry technique is used11.
This study has some limitations. First, its prospective design might have introduced a degree of case selection bias. Second, it was performed at a single center by experienced operators. Therefore, our findings are not necessarily generalizable to all CTO operators. Finally, the angiographic analyses were not performed by a core laboratory but by an experienced interventional cardiologist.
In conclusion, the prevalence of BFLs in our patients with CTO was similar to that already reported. The presence of BFLs in a vessel with CTO continues to be challenging for interventional cardiologists and may lead to more PMIs. No protection in the SB, use of a dissection-reentry strategy, ostial SB stenosis, and proximal MV stenosis of 50% or more were identified as predictors of SB occlusion after successful CTO recanalization. Further randomized studies are needed to investigate the optimal strategies to ensure better short-term and long-term outcomes.
