Deregulation of TLR4 signaling pathway characterizes Bicuspid Aortic valve syndrome
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) disease is recognized to be a syndrome with a complex and multifaceted pathophysiology. Its progression is modulated by diverse evolutionary conserved pathways, such as Notch-1 pathway. Emerging evidence is also highlighting the key role of TLR4 signaling pathway in the aortic valve pathologies and their related complications, such as sporadic ascending aorta aneurysms (AAA). Consistent with these observations, we aimed to evaluate the role of TLR4 pathway in both BAV disease and its common complication, such as AAA. To this aim, 70 subjects with BAV (M/F 50/20; mean age: 58.8 ± 14.8 years) and 70 subjects with tricuspid aortic valve (TAV) (M/F 35/35; mean age: 69.1 ± 12.8 years), with and without AAA were enrolled. Plasma assessment, tissue and gene expression evaluations were performed. Consistent with data obtained in the previous study on immune clonotypic T and B altered responses, we found reduced levels of systemic TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-17 cytokines in BAV cases, either in the presence or absence of AAA, than TAV cases (p < 0.0001 by ANOVA test). Interestingly, we also detected reduced levels of s-TLR4 in BAV cases with or without AAA in comparison to the two groups of TAV subjects (p < 0.0001 by ANOVA test). These results may suggest a deregulation in the activity or in the expression of TLR4 signaling pathway in all BAV cases. Portrait of these data is, indeed, the significantly decreased gene expression of inflammatory cytokines and TLR4, in both normal and aneurysmatic tissue samples, from BAV with AAA than TAV with AAA. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that subjects with BAV display a significant deregulation of TLR4 signaling pathway paralleled by a deregulation of Notch-1 pathway, as previously showed. This data suggests that the crosstalk between the Notch-1 and TLR4 signaling pathways may play a crucial role in both physiological embryological development, and homeostasis and functionality of aortic valve in adult life.
A novel evidence sustains that the Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) signaling pathway has the role of hub in preserving aorta homeostasis, but also in contributing to the onset of degenerative aorta diseases, such as aneurysms1. Consistent with this, it is emerging the key role of TLR4 signaling pathway in the complex pathophysiology of sporadic ascending aortic aneurysms (AAA)1. Accordingly, we recently postulated the model of the signaling pathway from the double-face1, supported by results of the recent investigations performed by our and other groups2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. Specifically, it proposes that AAA is the result of a sustained/excessive activation of TLR4 signaling pathway, expressed on both endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells, followed by its cross-talk with other pathways, including the Notch pathway, but also by TGF-β, NO, MMP, NF-Kβ pathways1,8.
Here, we investigated if TLR4 signaling pathway is involved as one of the main determinants of both pathophysiology and early onset of AAA in patients affected by bicuspid aortic valve (BAV). BAV is the most common congenital cardiac malformation, affecting approximately 1.3% of the population worldwide10,11,12 with AAA and dissection representing its common complications, even if the related mechanisms are not completely known10,11,12. We recently evidenced the presence of distinctive molecular and cellular mechanisms in BAV patients, when compared to tricuspid aortic valve (TAV) patients with or without AAA11,12,13. Specifically, we demonstrated an increased allele frequency of some polymorphisms in genes encoding molecules of NO, MMP, ACE pathways13, a quantitative reduction in the circulating levels of T and B lymphocytes cell subsets14, a deregulation of Notch 1 pathway and circulating endothelial progenitor cell (EPC)15 number in BAV cases compared to TAV cases, irrespective from the presence of AAA disease.
TLR4 signaling pathway is known to modulate both the expression and function of the above-mentioned pathways1. A close crosstalk between TLR-4 and the abovementioned pathways has been proposed1,16, which seems to explain the multitude of TLR4 actions and its biological effects on the cardiovascular system, as well as in the aorta and aortic valve. Of crucial importance, is the crosstalk between TLR-4 and Notch pathways1,16. A growing evidence supports these observations, as reported in previous works1,16.
Thus, alterations in these pathways result in a deregulation of vascular homeostasis and valvulogenesis, followed by both valve and vascular structure abnormalities and the onset of pathological conditions, such as valve degeneration, endothelial dysfunction, medial degeneration and vascular degeneration, significantly associated with the development and progression of AAA. Accordingly, we hypothesized that a deregulation of TLR-4 pathway could be related to BAV disease, thereby contributing to AAA onset and progression. Consequently, the main aim was to evaluate TLR-4 signaling in a cohort of BAV and TAV patients, with or without AAA13.
First, we tested blood levels of TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6 and IL-17 in plasma samples, since accumulating lines of evidence pointed out a crucial role of inflammation of the aortic wall in contributing to the development and progression of aortic aneurysm1,8,9,11,17,18,19. The comparisons, among the four groups, demonstrated that the systemic levels of these cytokines were lower in BAV subjects without AAA with respect to other groups (see Table 1). In BAV subjects with AAA, we observed a significant increase of systemic levels of these cytokines when compared to the levels of BAV cases without AAA. In contrast, TAV individuals showed higher significant levels of these cytokines independently of the presence or absence of AAA, when compared to BAV cases with or without AAA. The presence of AAA determined a rise of inflammatory cytokines in BAV cases, but to a lesser extent than TAV individuals (see Table 1). Thus, a deregulated immune response seems to occur in BAV cases.
We also assessed the systemic levels of soluble TLR4 (s-TLR4) in plasma samples of the four groups enrolled. Levels of s-TLR4 depict the presence or absence of a constitutive balance between activation and inhibition of TLR4 signaling pathway1,20,21,22, representing decoy receptors with inhibitor action. This allows the control of TLR4 physiological actions in the milieu of the aortic wall, that is important for the homeostasis of aortic tissue1. Interestingly, we found reduced levels of s-TLR4 in BAV cases with or without AAA in comparison to the two groups of TAV subjects (1.5 ± 1.8 and 8.5 ± 2.1 vs. 12.7 ± 4.3 and 75 ± 5.3(ng/ml), respectively). This data should seem to indicate a deregulation in the activity or in the expression of TLR4 signaling pathway in all BAV cases.
To validate the significant reduction of plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines and the soluble form of TLR4 in all BAV subjects, we also evaluated the expression levels of TLR4 and IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17 genes in aorta tissues harvested from patients with BAV and TAV affected by AAA undergoing surgery. Specifically, they were detected in normal (control samples) and aneurysm aortic portions harvested from patients undergoing elective surgical repair. As represented in Fig. 1, the comparison of the levels of TLR4 gene expression, among the four groups, revealed significant differences (p < 0.0001, by ANOVA test, Bonferroni corrected, or t test, Welch corrected).
Expression levels of gene encoding TLR4 (relative to GAPDH). The figure reports the gene expression levels of TLR4 in normal or aneurysmatic tissue samples from 51 BAV and 25 TAV cases with AAA. The comparison of data showed significant differences among the four groups with p < 0.0001, by ANOVA test, Bonferroni corrected. Significant also were the levels of TLR4 gene expression by comparing data in normal aorta tissues from BAV and TAV cases (p = 0.0001, by t test, Welch corrected), and between two levels in aneurymatic tissue samples from TAV and BAV groups with AAA (p = 0.0001, by t test, Welch corrected). However, the lowest levels were observed in normal aorta tissues from BAV with AAA, that confirmed their systemic levels of s-TLR4. The statistical significance was detected by using t test and ANOVA test, when appropriate.
Of note, we observed that the levels of TLR4 gene expression were significantly lower in both, normal and aneurysmatic aorta samples from BAV cases with or without AAA in comparison to TAV cases with or without AAA (see Fig. 1). They increased in BAV aneurysmatic aorta samples, but they showed, significant reduced values, when compared to gene expression levels of TLR4 in aneurysmatic aorta tissue samples from TAV cases with AAA (see Fig. 1). Likewise, we detected similar data by comparing the expression levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17 genes in normal aorta and aortic aneurysmatic samples from BAV and TAV patients (see Fig. 2). Increased gene expression was observed in aneurysmatic samples from both BAV and TAV patients, with higher levels observed in TAV cases (p = 0.0001, by t test, Welch corrected). Of note, a lowest expression of these four (TLR4, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17) genes was detected in in normal aortic tissue samples from BAV cases (see Figs. 1, 2).
Expression levels of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines. The figure reports the gene expression levels of IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-7 in normal or aneurysmatic tissue samples from 51 BAV and 25 TAV cases with AAA. The comparison of data of each cytokine gene detected significant differences among the four groups with p < 0.0001, by ANOVA test, Bonferroni corrected, and between normal and aneurysmatic aorta tissues from BAV and TAV cases (p = 0.0001, by t test, Welch corrected), with the lowest peaks in all the aorta tissues from BAV cases. The statistical significance was detected by using t test and ANOVA test, when appropriate.
Chronic inflammation is recognized to be involved in degenerative pathological conditions of both aorta and aortic valve1,8,9,17,18,19. The early degeneration of aortic valve, accompanied by several serious complications (i.e. AAA, the most common), usually occurs in case of bicuspid valve condition10,11,12. BAV, initially considered the result of a simple embryonic defect during the valvulogenesis, is today recognized to have a complex pathophysiology11,12,23 and progression mediated by diverse evolutionary conserved pathways, such as Notch-1, as recently demonstrated by our group10,11,15. Established evidence is also demonstrating the key role of inflammatory pathways, such as TLR4 signaling pathway, in the aortic valve pathologies, such as calcific aortic valve disease11,15. In aortic valve, TLR4 signaling pathway is expressed in both human aortic valve endothelial and interstitial cells24,25,26,27, and mediates its biological effects fundamentally via modulation of Notch-1 pathway28. Recently, we demonstrated and emphasized this concept and the crucial role of TLR-4 signaling pathway in the onset and progression of AAA1,8,15,16.
Consistent with these observations, in this study we aimed to evaluate the role of this pathway in BAV disease and its common complication, such as AAA. We found reduced levels of both gene and tissue expression of TLR4 signaling pathway in BAV cases, independently of the presence or absence of AAA. Portrait of these data is the decreased gene expression of inflammatory cytokines, that we detected in aorta tissue samples from BAV cases in comparison to TAV cases. We also observed significant reduced systemic levels of these cytokines in plasma samples from BAV cases, and particularly in those without AAA.
Thus, a deregulated gene ad tissue expression of TLR4 signaling pathway seems to characterize BAV disease. This signature might also explain the reduced levels of the regulatory molecules, such as s-TLR4, detected in plasma samples from BAV cases in respect to TAV subjects. In addition, the concomitant deregulation of Notch-1 pathways, previously observed in BAV cases15, might also justify the reduced numbers of circulating T and B subsets and EPC14,15. These two pathways are, indeed, known to play a crucial role in physiological haematopoiesis29,30, the physiological release and functionality of progenitors, such as EPC8,30,31, as well as in embryological organogenesis and valvulogenesis1,16,23,30,32.
For these reasons we support the concept of BAV as a syndrome11,12,23, with a complex pathophysiology, characterized by the deregulation of TLR4 and Notch-1 pathways, that are known to be crucial for the physiological homeostasis and function of aortic valve endothelial (AVEC) and interstitial (AVIC) cells, as well as the aorta wall cells. Consequently, we propose that the altered function and expression of these two pathways, observed in BAV disease, result in a reduced functionality of AVEC, AVIC and aortic wall cells, with an increased susceptibility to senescence and chronic inflammation finally leading to a functional impairment8,9,16,33,34,35.
The principal limitation of the study relies on the fact that it is associative, and this could limit the identification of the true cause-effect relationship between TLR4 signaling pathway and BAV disease, and its complication AAA. Regarding this aspect, it should also consider that the TLR-4 function and expression are modulated not only by genetic variants and haplotypes1,9,36, but also by environmental factors (such as diet37, mite allergens and air pollution38), and their cross-interaction with microbiota37, which may remain in a healthy state or show alterations (i.e. dysbiosis and consequent endotoxemia associated with age or obesity)39 and consequent epigenetic changes40. Current evidence is also demonstrating that  pharmacological treatments, such as antihypertension drugs (i.e. candesartan, an angiotensin type 1 receptor (AT1R) blocker) can inhibit the TLR4/Angiotensin II-induced NF-κB inflammatory signaling41. Thus, differences in the pharmacological therapy administrated to various patients may represent another confounding factor. However, in our study, all the BAV and TAV patients were subjected to the same antihypertensive treatment. Furthermore, no investigations in this study were also performed for evaluating, whereas the reduced expression and function of TLR4 pathway correlated with a reduced grade of renewal and senescence of AVEC components of BAV valve than TAV valve. This might confirm the important data obtained in the previous study about the reduced circulating levels of EPC detected in BAV cases independently by the presence or not of an associated aortopathy. Lastly, another limitation might be represented by the fact that age was lower in subjects with BAV thereby hypothetically interfering with the results even if this depends on the early onset of complications in BAV cases with respect to TAV cases.
