'A New You, That’s Who': an evaluation of short videos on puberty and human reproduction
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-018-0147-z
Learning basic information about puberty and human reproduction can alleviate concerns about the transition to adolescence and provide a foundation for later learning about more advanced reproductive health topics, such as family planning. Parents and children alike believe educational videos make these topics more engaging, and socio-cultural theory suggests such videos can effectively promote learning. To that end, we tested the efficacy of a series of reproductive health education videos called 'A New You, That’s Who', with a sample of 80 11-year-old children in a research laboratory setting. The series was designed with socio-cultural theory learning principles in mind and consisted of three 5-min animated music videos focused on puberty, reproductive anatomy, and menstruation. Children were randomly assigned to watch the 'A New You, That’s Who' videos or a control set of videos on the scientific method. Children who watched the treatment videos out-performed peers in the control group on a measure reproductive health knowledge. However, there were no differences in attitudes towards puberty between conditions. The videos provide effective ways to learn factual information about puberty and human reproduction, and may be valuable tools to supplement social-emotional lessons provided at home, at school, or in other real-world settings.
By age 11, most children begin showing signs of puberty, with girls typically achieving pubertal milestones earlier than boys (Walvoord, 2010). It is optimal for parents, teachers, and health educators to provide both boys and girls basic information about human reproduction topics (e.g., puberty, reproductive anatomy, menstruation) in advance of major pubertal milestones (Goldman, 2011; Zimvrakaki and Athanasiou, 2004). Empowered with this knowledge, children are better intellectually and emotionally prepared for dramatic changes happening to their bodies (Winn et al. 1995). As children mature throughout adolescence, they can continue building upon their foundational reproductive health knowledge, which can lead to stronger learning about more advanced human reproduction topics, such as family planning (Goldman, 2011; UNESCO, 2009; LeCroy et al. 2018; Stubbs, 2016). Unfortunately, children’s reproductive health knowledge usually falls far below recommended educational benchmarks—at least in the Midwestern U.S. where the present data were collected—(Hurwitz et al. 2017), and youth in early adolescence are rarely the focus of educational intervention (LeCroy et al. 2018).
Learning about puberty and reproductive health can be sensitive topics for children. However, past research indicates that children recognize the importance of learning foundational reproductive health information (Zimvrakaki and Athanasiou, 2004) and believe learning tools, such as educational films, might help to elevate their level of knowledge around these topics (Haglund, 2006). Such videos might be able to supplement and extend the educational experiences parents and teachers are able to provide (Fisher, 1986; UNESCO, 2009). After all, there is extensive research showing that school-age children can learn lessons about science and health topics from curriculum-based media (Fisch, 2004) and that educational films can help to alleviate anxiety around health issues (Wartella et al. 2014). To that end, in the present study, we tested the efficacy of A New You, That’s Who, a series of three 5-minute animated music videos designed to teach youth in early adolescence about puberty, reproductive anatomy, and menstruation. Focusing on a sample of 11-year-old children living in the greater metropolitan area of a major Midwestern U.S. city, we aimed to determine whether these videos could positively impact children’s knowledge about and attitudes towards puberty and human reproduction.
As shown in Table 2, we first examined the bivariate correlations of the demographic, pretest, and outcome variables. For our main analyses, we examined puberty and human reproduction knowledge, as well as puberty attitudes, using independent samples t-tests to compare the scores of the treatment and control groups. We followed these with analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models comparing between conditions while also controlling for gender, pretest scores, and household income (see Table 3). Income, parent education, parent marital status, and child race were significantly intercorrelated, and income was the only one of these variables to correlate with either outcome measure. Consequently, we controlled for income, rather than those other variables. For similar reasons, we controlled for child pretest scores rather than age. Results do not change substantially if we control for age rather than pretest (see supplemental Table S1; https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/MSXKJG).
Children in the treatment condition significantly outperformed those in the control group on the reproductive health knowledge posttest. On average, children in the treatment condition received scores of 15.67 out of 21 on this measure (SD = 2.40 points), while children in the control condition received scores of 11.27 (SD = 3.73), t(78) = 6.27, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.33, Cohen’s d = 1.43. Table 3 displays the results of the ANCOVA model, which incorporate pretest and demographic controls. Importantly, the difference between the treatment and control group remained significant in this model. There also was a main effect of pretest scores, with pretest scores positively predicting posttest scores, and of gender, with boys (M = 14.02, SD = 3.7) significantly outperforming girls (M = 12.98, SD = 3.9). Household income was not a significant predictor.
Condition did not predict puberty attitude scores (Mtreatment = 0.002, SD = 0.86 vs. Mcontrol = −0.01, SD = 0.69, t(78) = 0.22, p = .82, η2 < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.02). In the ANCOVA model, condition still did not significantly predict attitudes, as shown in Table 3. There was, however, a main effect of gender, with boys (M = .33, SD = .72) having a significantly more positive attitude than girls (M = −.28, SD = .71). Puberty attitudes were not related to pretest scores or household income.
The A New You, That’s Who videos were highly effective at scaffolding children’s learning about puberty and human reproduction, but did not have an impact on puberty-related attitudes. Below, we discuss each of these findings in greater detail.
The videos had a statistically significant and large effect on children’s topical knowledge (Cohen, 1988). The overall effect found in the present study was about 3–5 times greater than the average effect for educational videos on health and science knowledge (Mares and Pan, 2013), and for parent- (Widman et al. 2016) or teacher-directed sexual education lessons (Fonner et al. 2014). Because weak foundational knowledge about puberty and human can make it more challenging for children to later grasp more advanced reproductive health concepts (UNESCO, 2009), it is encouraging that these free videos successfully promoted learning in these areas in the context of this study.
In all likelihood, the videos facilitated strong learning by conveying new information in a manner aligned with socio-cultural theory (e.g., Watkins, 1985) and with children’s natural iconic and symbolic representational thought (Calvert, 1999), and in a way that reflected accumulated empirical evidence about optimal video design (e.g., Fisch, 2004). The use of music with lyrics that occasionally rhymed may have signaled to children they should pay attention to the videos, which in turn may have facilitated learning (Anderson and Lorch, 1983). This contradicts previous research, which did not document learning gains for educational information delivered via song (Calvert, 2001). It may be, in this case, the host of visual animation techniques and touches of humor reinforced the lyrics in way that uniquely promoted learning (Fisch, 2004). Most video segments began with a wide angle shot of the human body and then focused on the organ or other element being concurrently described in the song lyrics (Dalacosta et al. 2009), never showing extraneous physiology (Buckley and Quellmalz, 2013). Together, these visual techniques may have helped children to develop accurate iconic representations of relevant processes. Additionally, the animation style may have signaled to children that the videos were targeting them (Huston et al. 2007), allowing the production team to create a zone of proximal develop by layering in advanced reproductive health vocabulary (Bickham et al. 2012). It also probably helped that the lyrics repeated vocabulary and other advanced concepts within and across videos (Fisch, 2004). Future research may help disentangle which production element or combination of elements was most responsible for the positive results.
The videos did not impact children’s puberty attitudes. While educational video excels at promoting an understanding of concrete physical phenomena that can be shown visually and vocabulary that can be used in context, theoretical work suggests it is less successful at promoting abstract ideas (Fisch, 2004), such as the notion that puberty is not something to fear. Indeed, other studies looking at learning from video about other topics have found small to negligible effects on students’ attitudes (e.g., Jennings, 2013). Videos that have been successful in this regard showed characters who engaged in relatively lengthy modeling sequences (e.g., undergoing a full medical procedure), and, in some cases, researchers prompted children to practice modeled behaviors (e.g., Klingman et al. 1984). Although the New You videos did show prepubescent characters quickly grow into postpubescent bodies, these depictions were brief, and the characters were relatively passive during these moments of transition. Characters may have needed to engage in more active behaviors that children could strive to emulate to prompt attitudinal changes. Longer exposure also may have been necessary to counter the myriad negative messages children, especially girls, may have already received about pubertal developments elsewhere (Stubbs, 2016). Alternatively, it is also possible our three-item attitude measure was insensitive to change following short video exposure.
Nonetheless, there may be more of a need for videos that promote factual knowledge than impact attitudes. Because of the sensitive nature of these topics, parents and experts alike advocate for parents to be children’s first teachers in this area (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; KRC Research and Consulting, 1991b). Parents may be best equipped to discuss the social-emotional aspects of transitioning to puberty (KRC Research and Consulting, 1991b). Videos in turn might be more appropriate for delivering high level information about hormonal and physiological processes, technical areas parents or even educators might have lower comfort teaching (Fisher, 1986; UNESCO, 2009; Zimvrakaki and Athanasiou, 2004).
This was an efficacy evaluation conducted with a convenience sample in a university research space with few distractors and with learning assessed immediately after video exposure. It is possible children may have been more attentive in this setting than a school environment. Several children imagined classroom peer dynamics might lead their classmates to make jokes about the content. It also may be that children or families with low levels of comfort or knowledge about these topics opted not to enroll in this study, and effects could be lower for such a population (LeCroy et al. 2018). Conversely, it is also possible learning from the videos would have been even stronger in a naturalistic setting, as teachers or parents could have made opportunities to scaffold children’s learning (Takeuchi and Stevens, 2011). Our testing protocol did not allow children to pause the videos to take notes or to re-watch tricky segments, and it also did not provide time for parents or researchers to help clarify any points presented in the videos. Other research suggests that learning from science visuals is stronger when students learn in a classroom over multiple class periods and when they have some control over video pacing (McElhaney et al. 2015). Future research should assess these videos in a more naturalistic setting and using a more rigorous control (e.g., exposing children to a competitor video series). To provide an even stronger test of the robustness and meaningfulness of children’s learning, it also would be helpful for future researchers to assess children’s retention of what they have learned after a delay.
Nonetheless, based on these promising findings, the video development team has begun considering ways to make the video series even more comprehensive. To that end, the team created new discussion prompts to accompany the videos and intends to create a robust suite of supplementary materials for teachers. The team also has discussed creating videos focused on additional topics. The existing videos largely focused on the biology and biochemistry underlying pubertal processes, but there is a need for related educational content on other topics, such as the biology of sexual orientation and identity, and the characteristics of healthy romantic relationships (Forrest et al. 2004; Gegenfurtner and Gebhardt, 2017; Stubbs, 2016).
