The effect of coronary slow flow on left atrial structure and function
The coronary slow flow phenomenon (CSFP) is common in coronary angiography, however its impact on left atrial (LA) function is still controversial. This study aims to evaluate the LA structure and function of patients with CSFP using two-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography (2D-STE). Consecutive patients scheduled for coronary angiography from January 2016 to September 2017 were enrolled in this study. Patients’ demographic data, clinical histories, laboratory and angiographic findings were collected and recorded. Diagnostic criteria for CSFP is based on Beltrame et al. proposed in 2012. Meanwhile 139 patients who have no significant stenosis (≤ 40%) and normal blood flow were selected as control. All patients received an echocardiographic examination 24 h before coronary angiography. LA structure and function were measured with echocardiography and 2D-STE. Our results showed that among the 1,954 patients who had received coronary angiography, 512 patients were included in the analysis after the exclusion criteria was implemented. Of those, 101 patients met the CSFP criteria (5.5%). CSFP is mainly seen in LAD (~ 70%). There was no statistical difference in baseline characteristics between the CSFP group and control group, except for a higher proportion of smokers in the CSFP group (P = 0.001). The percentage of monocytes is an independent risk factor for the occurrence of CSFP (P = 0.036) after binary logistic regression analysis. The LA global longitudinal strain (LA-GLS, represents reservoir functions) decreased and LA strain rate at late diastole (LA-SRa, represents booster function) increased in patients with CSFP compared to the control group (P < 0.05). Correlation test of continuous variables by Pearson test suggested that LA-GLS was negatively correlated with TIMI frame count (TFC). We concluded that the percentage of monocytes is an independent risk factor for the CSFP; the LA reservoir and booster functions were impaired in patients with CSFP; LA-GLS is negatively correlated with TFC.
Since the coronary slow flow phenomenon (CSFP) was firstly described by Tambe1, it has attracted significant attention among cardiologists. The CSFP is diagnosed based on the results of coronary angiography. The current adapted diagnostic criteria was proposed by Beltrame2 where CSFP is characterized by delayed distal vessel opacification of contrast in the absence of significant epicardial coronary stenosis (coronary artery stenosis ≤ 40%), with the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) blood flow grade of 2 or corrected TIMI frame count (cTFC) of greater than 27 frames in one or more epicardial vessels. CSFP is still a "phenomenon" because its definition is based on visual findings of delayed contrast filling of the distal coronary artery in the absence of significantly obstructive vascular disease. Its pathophysiological mechanism remains unclear. Some researchers believe it represents a pathology related to an underlying dysfunction of microvascular resistance, thrombocyte dysfunction, oxidative stress, systemic/local inflammation, and/or a combination of all listed factors3,4,5.
CSFP is not rare, with an incidence of approximately 1–5.5% in patients scheduled for coronary angiography6,7,8. Some cardiologists believe it is often underrecognized, and the incidence could be as high as 34%9. The clinical manifestations of patients with CSFP are diverse, but more than 80% of patients can have repeated chest pain episodes that could last for an extended period of time10 and could also occur at rest11. The clinical symptoms range from severe, such as acute coronary syndrome, or mild, such as chest tightness, and sometimes CSF can even cause fatal ventricular arrhythmias12,13,14. Studies have shown that younger patients are more likely to develop CSFP, and the prevalence is higher in men than women7. CSFP is more likely seen in smokers13, patients with metabolic syndrome and high BMI15, and patients with anxiety, depression16 and sleep apnea17.
CSFP can cause left ventricular dysfunction, mainly left ventricular diastolic dysfunction18,19. However, the effect of CSFP on left atrial function has been minimally investigated. A few studies can be found in the existing literature, but the conclusion is controversial20,21. The left atrium serves an integral role in cardiac performance and is closely related to left ventricle function. Hemodynamic changes in the left atrium promote the formation of thrombosis, causing thromboembolism, stroke, and atrial fibrillation22,23. Abnormal left atrial function can affect left ventricular filling and cause a decrease in cardiac output. Accurate evaluation of the structure and function of the left atrium has important significance in clinic settings22,24. Traditional methods using two-dimensional (2D) echocardiography for left atrial function assessment gives limited information depending on hemodynamic loading and geometric measurements25 and may not fully reflect the left atrial function. 2D speckle tracking echocardiography (2D-STE) is a relatively new echocardiographic technique developed for quantitative evaluation of cardiac function. This technology quantifies the movement of the myocardium by tracking the trajectory of the myocardial acoustic spot during the cardiac cycle. Because it is a more sensitive technique for the evaluation of cardiac function versus traditional echocardiography, it could provide greater accuracy when determining LA function in CSFP patients25,26. In this study we used 2D-STE for evaluating the LA deformation in patients with CSFP and compared the findings with control patients to investigate the effect of CSFP on LA structure and function.
When comparing the patients’ demographic and clinical data of the CSFP group and control group, there was no statistical difference in age (P = 0.66), gender (P = 0.46), prevalence of hypertension (P = 0.94), diabetes (p = 0.07), systolic blood pressure (P = 0.94), diastolic blood pressure (P = 0.96), heart rate (P = 0.47), and body mass index (P = 0.07), except for smoking history (35.6% in CSFP group vs. 17.2% in control group, P < 0.001) (Table 1).
1,954 consecutive patients underwent coronary angiography due to suspected coronary artery disease during January 2016–September 2017 in the catheterization lab of the affiliated Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University. Out of those 1954 patients, 512 were included in the study after the exclusion criteria was applied. Based on the recommendations of CSFP by Beltrame et al.2, 101 patients were identified to have CSFP (~ 5.5%). At the same time, 139 patients who had normal coronary angiography were selected as the control group from the same data pool. Among 101 patients with CSFP, 50 patients (49.5%) were observed to have all three vessel involvement, 28 patients (27.7%) with two vessel involvement, and 23 patients (22.8%) with only one vessel involvement. The LAD was the most frequently engaged (70.3% of cases), followed by RCA (55.4%) and LCX (46.5%) respectively. Using corrected TIMI frame count (cTFC) to quantify the blood flow velocity, we found that there was a statistical difference between the CSF group and control group, and it was independent of use of different contrast agents (Table 2).
There was no significant difference between the CSF group and the control group in white blood cell count, red blood cell count, average red blood cell volume, hemoglobin concentration, coefficient of variation of red blood cells, distribution width of red blood cells, platelet count, platelet hematocrit, platelet distribution width, mean platelet volume, proportion of large, albumin, total bilirubin, uric acid, urea nitrogen, fasting blood glucose, creatinine, total triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein, NT-proBNP, homocysteine, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. However, a statistically significant difference was observed in the percentage of monocytes, absolute value of monocytes, monocytes cell/high density lipoprotein ratio, hemoglobin, hematocrit, the average erythrocyte hemoglobin concentration, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein (P < 0.05) (Table 3).
The univariate variables with statistical differences were then incorporated into the binary logistic regression equation, with the CSF group assigned “1” and the control group assigned “0”. The results showed that the percentage of monocytes was an independent risk factor for the occurrence of coronary artery slow blood flow (OR value 1.354, 95% CI 1.020–1.797, P = 0.036) (Table 4).
There was no statistically significant difference between the CSF group and the control group in the transverse and long diameter of the left atrium, however, there was a statistically significant difference observed in anterior–posterior diameter of the left atrium between the two groups (Table 5).
Using 2D-STE to evaluate the LA function, we observed statistically significant differences regarding the 2D STE-derived indices, including left atrial ejection fraction (LA-EF), left atrium minimum volume index (LAVI-min), left atrium global longitudinal strain (LA-mGLS) and late diastolic strain rate (LA-mSRA) (P < 0.05) (Table 6).
The correlation of continuous variables was selected for analysis by Pearson test, and was aimed at exploring whether the mean blood flow velocity mTFC of the three vessels was correlated with the left atrial strain index. The results showed that there was a negative correlation between LA-GLS and mTFC (P < 0.05), and there was no correlation between LA-SRS, LA-SRE, LA-SRA, and mTFC (P = 0.44; P = 0.62; P = 0.22; Fig. 2).
(A) LA-GLS and mTFC correlation test; (B) LA-SRS and mTFC correlation test; (C) LA-SRE and mTFC correlation test; (D) LA-SRA and mTFC correlation test. LA-GLS left atrial global longitudinal strain, LA-SRS left atrial longitudinal strain rate (systolic), LA-SRE left atrial longitudinal strain rate (early diastolic), LA-SRA left atrial longitudinal strain rate (late diastolic), mTFC average of TIMI frame count.
Unlike the relatively clear definition, the pathophysiology of CSFP is not fully understood. Several possible mechanisms have been proposed, such as the endothelial dysfunction theory28, early atherosclerosis29, microvascular disease5,30, platelet dysfunction31, changes in hemorheology32,33, and oxidative stress and local/systemic inflammatory response3,4,5. Recently, some studies have indicated that lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A234, plasma choline35, or serum salusin beta level36 could be a predictive or diagnostic biomarker for CSF.
In this study, we found a statistically significant difference in the percentage of monocytes between the CSF group and the control group. The percentage of monocytes was determined to be an independent risk factor for the occurrence of CSFP after using regression analysis. Monocytes play an important role in the occurrence and development of atherosclerosis, which precipitates the progression of atherosclerotic plaques from a stable state to an unstable state37,38. Coronary intravascular ultrasounds have revealed intimal thickening, diffuse vascular wall calcification, and atheromatous plaque formation in the epicardial coronary arteries of CSF patients38,39, indicating that CSFP may be an early manifestation of coronary atherosclerosis or part of systemic atherosclerosis29,38. Mononuclear cells have been shown to be indirectly involved in three related processes in the development of atherosclerosis37,38: (1) mononuclear cells can be activated by risk factors such as smoking, diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, which accelerates the progression of atherosclerosis, (2) mononuclear cells participate in the inflammatory response in the acute phase of unstable plaque rupture, acute coronary syndrome, and other homeostatic imbalances, (3) mononuclear cells can enter myocardial tissue in the hypoxic phase during acute coronary events, promoting myofibroblast regeneration, angiogenesis, and repair and remodeling of the myocardium. Although there are studies indicating the involvement of HDL in the regulation of monocyte functions40, we did not find a statistical difference in HDL between the CSF group and the control group in our study. In addition, we also noticed a higher prevalence of smoking and a higher BMI in the CSF group than that of the control group, which can be linked with some recent findings. There are several studies indicating that smoking can induce endothelial dysfunction through oxidative stress41,42, which is involved in the development of CSFP. Metabolic syndrome (such as obesity, high BMI, diabetes, etc.) has similar effects on vascular endothelium. Obesity and a high BMI can cause endothelial dysfunction through an imbalance in the production of vasodilatory agents, thus inducing CSFP15,43.
The left atrium plays an important role in ensuring proper performance of left ventricular function and the systemic circulation. From a hemodynamic perspective, the left atrium possesses three functions: as a reservoir, passive conduit and booster pump24,44. The LA size and function has an important clinical and prognosis impact22,24. Evaluation of LA size and function can be obtained by traditional 2D-echocardiography, however these parameters are morphometric and static. 2D-STE is a relatively new echocardiographic technique which uses standard B-mode images for regional and global myocardial function analysis. The technology tracks the spatial dislocation of speckles, which is assumed to represent myocardial deformation44,45. 2D-STE analysis gives an excellent assessment of the atrial deformation profile during an entire cardiac cycle by closely following the LA physiology25,46,47. In contrast to Doppler derived parameters, speckle tracking has the advantages of being angle-independent, less load-dependent than ejection fraction, and less affected by reverberations, side lobes and drop out artifacts. 2D-STE was found to be a feasible, reproducible and sensitive method to assess LA function47,48,49. Several studies have shown that strain imaging can detect LA dysfunction before the manifestation of LA structural changes49,50,51.
The effect of CSFP on LA functions remains controversial20,51,52. Wang et al.52 evaluated the LA function in 82 patients with CSFP and compared with normal control participants. They observed decreased LA conduit function and increased LA pump function in patients with CSFP, but no significant differences regarding LA phasic emptying volume and emptying fraction were observed between the two groups. However, in another study with 1:1 patient-control matching design for age, sex, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and the LV function by Fallah20, the authors did not find significant differences regarding triphasic LA functions assessed through 2D-STE between the CSFP group and control group. In this study, our results showed that minimum left atrial volume index (LAVImin) increased and left atrial ejection fraction (LA-EF) decreased in the CSFP group compared with the control group, although no statistically significant differences were found in the LA size (i.e., antero-posterior diameter, lateral diameter and LA length) and maximum left atrium volume index (LAVIm) between the two groups. Meanwhile, we found that patients with CSF have lower LA-mLGS and higher late diastolic strain rate (LA-mSRA), suggesting an impairment of left atrial reservoir function and booster function in patients with CSFP. The correlation test revealed a negative correlation between LA-mGLS and mTFC, suggesting that the overall LA function will further decrease with a decrease in coronary blood flow velocity.
Firstly, this is a single-center conducted retrospective study and 2D-STE data was measured by a single-skilled echocardiologist. Secondly, the patients’ usage of medications was not taken into consideration. Finally, no follow-up data was provided at this time.
