Development and virtual validation of a novel digital workflow to rehabilitate palatal defects by using smartphone-integrated stereophotogrammetry (SPINS)
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87240-9
Palatal defects are rehabilitated by fabricating maxillofacial prostheses called obturators. The treatment incorporates taking deviously unpredictable impressions to facsimile the palatal defects into plaster casts for obturator fabrication in the dental laboratory. The casts are then digitally stored using expensive hardware to prevent physical damage or data loss and, when required, future obturators are digitally designed, and 3D printed. Our objective was to construct and validate an economic in-house smartphone-integrated stereophotogrammetry (SPINS) 3D scanner and to evaluate its accuracy in designing prosthetics using open source/free (OS/F) digital pipeline. Palatal defect models were scanned using SPINS and its accuracy was compared against the standard laser scanner for virtual area and volumetric parameters. SPINS derived 3D models were then used to design obturators by using (OS/F) software. The resultant obturators were virtually compared against standard medical software designs. There were no significant differences in any of the virtual parameters when evaluating the accuracy of both SPINS, as well as OS/F derived obturators. However, limitations in the design process resulted in minimal dissimilarities. With further improvements, SPINS based prosthetic rehabilitation could create a viable, low cost method for rural and developing health services to embrace maxillofacial record keeping and digitised prosthetic rehabilitation.
Removable obturator prostheses are commonly provisioned to those with palatal defects, acquired or congenital. The conventional procedure of fabricating an obturator requires taking an impression of the upper dental arch and defected palate following a series of complex methods which are both technique sensitive and pose serious risks to the patient. Risks include dislodgement of impression material into the defect cavity, immunological reactions toward foreign body within a healing cavity and secondary infections necessitating hospitalisation1,2.
If taken successfully, the impression of the palate is converted into dental cast models, upon which a temporary prosthesis is fabricated and periodically readjusted to facilitate proper healing. Clinicians may also wish to refer to the defect cast models during readjustment phase. After provision of temporary obturators, the models are stored away and retrieved upon future needs; which is usually during fabrication of definitive prostheses after completion of healing3. The physical cast models are frequently damaged, deteriorated, misplaced, or weathered which warrant taking another set of impressions prior to definitive prostheses fabrication. This ordeal creates inconveniences for both the patient and the clinician, prolonging treatment durations and increase the likelihood of compromised clinical success. In recent years, CAD–CAM and rapid prototyping in prosthetic dentistry have introduced methods of averting these issues4.
Advanced healthcare facilities within urban vicinities have slowly transitioned toward digital record keeping and the use of proprietary 3D scanners with CAD systems for complete digital prosthetic rehabilitations. After scanning, the prosthetic moulds/templates are then virtually designed in CAD, and 3D printed on demand; averting impression-related risks to the patient while saving valuable time for the clinicians4. This allows for the cast models to be stored indefinitely within a virtual space averting the risks of weathering and accidental damage.
While proprietary 3D scanners with medical grade CAD systems dominate the standard pathways for digitised rehabilitation, state-of-the-art practices such as these are almost exclusively limited to urban and wealthy establishments5. Rehabilitation care provided at remote practices often lack the funds and necessary support to facilitate a fully digitized workflow6. Furthermore, majority of the registered patients requiring prosthetic rehabilitation in suburban and rural are from middle to low socio-economic demographics7. Proprietary Scanning and CAD technology is expensive to purchase and upkeep, the cost of which cannot be economically justified without subsidisation when digitization is attempted for patients who require financial aid within peripheral clinical practices.
Increased smartphone usage and a plethora of associated affordable technological advances have created substantial inclusivity worldwide8. Feasible, constantly improving, open source and portable technology is slowly bridging the gap between developing and developed countries6 as the world advances toward space revolution with NASA’s latest Mars exploration unit (‘Ingenuity’) also reported to have been powered by smartphone processors9.
Therefore, it is now appropriate to ask the following questions:
Can a smartphone be used as an alternative to scan defect cast models as accurately as one of the standard laser scanners?
Can a cost-effective digital workflow be developed which utilise the smartphone scanned models to accurately facilitate digital obturator templates?
To answer these questions, the current study attempted to construct and virtually validate an in-house, low-cost SmartPhone INtegrated Stereophotogrammetry (SPINS) 3D scanner to scan simulated defect models. The data from the scans were then utilised to design obturator bulbs by using open source/free CAD software (OS/F). It was hypothesised that there will be no significant virtual differences between:
3D cast models derived from SPINS versus models obtained from standard laser scanning.
obturator templates designed using OS/F versus the standard proprietary digital workflows.
For all 6 smartphones, there were no significant differences in MSA (P = 0.97) and VV (P = 0.94) (Supplementary B, Phases A & B). In addition, an average HD of < 0.5 mm and DSC > 0.9 on two completely different sets of dentitions (Models 2 and 18) suggest that the SPINS 3D models generated from all 6 smartphones were very similar and therefore the choice of smartphone would likely have negligible influence on the comparative outcomes for Phases C and D.
Virtual property differences between models derived from laser scan and smartphone-based photogrammetry are presented in Table 1. There were no statistically significant differences in MSA (P = 0.55) and VV (P = 0.73) across all 36 models, with HD < 0.5 mm and an average similarity of 92.97% (Supplementary B, Phase C). Individual model analysis showed that 72.22% of the models independently met HD acceptability (< 0.5 mm) while all the models met DSC acceptability (> 0.7). DSC ranged between 0.90 and 0.99. Area discordance of the models (Fig. 4) demonstrated that majority of the point discrepancies and lack of spatial overlap comprised at the margins and fine anatomy of the dental arch, but less frequently in the defect area. Laser scan reproduced more accurate dental arches than SPINS set at 72 images per 3D model.
Area discordance reports for Phase C. The amount of HD variation per model comparison is shown in the bar chart and is colour coded. The exact location of the discrepancy is shown on the model above with the respective colours.
There were no significant differences (P > 0.05) in all 4 parameters as shown in Table 2. OS/F satisfied DSC threshold of > 0.7 with an average similarity of over 80% but with mean HD of 0.55 for Set B and 0.65 for Set C. 61.1% and 94.44% of the models in Set B independently met HD and DSC acceptability thresholds, respectively. Set C, however, demonstrated that 44.44% and 94.44% of the models met acceptability thresholds. The area discordance data for each bulb is presented in Supplementary B, Phase D which show majority of the discrepancy points were located on the outer surface of the bulbs. Set C demonstrated more discrepancies on the inner bulb surfaces than Set B.
This study was performed to create an affordable smartphone-integrated stereophotogrammetry workflow and validate whether prosthetic obturators could be designed in CAD using such a pipeline. Based on the results obtained, both null hypotheses could not be rejected as there were no significant differences (P > 0.05) in all four comparative parameters: MSA, VV, HD and DSC (Tables 1, 2). SPINS is not aimed at replacing the existing conventional laser or intraoral scanners, rather to propose a cost-effective option for rural and developing sectors globally to embrace digitalisation of maxillofacial prosthetic rehabilitation.
Based on the irregular nature of the defects within the current study and the convenience of computerised analyses, it was considered more practical to measure area and 3D parameters10 over linear measurements that were carried out in previous studies11,15,26,27. Surface area and volume were used to estimate the shape and dimensions of the prostheses. Hausdorff’s distance measured the mutual proximity of any given point on two similar objects, which was then visually represented by area discordance. DSC analysed the volumetric spatial overlap between two objects. As seen in previous studies12,21,23,25, these two parameters can provide a reliable estimate of how similar two virtual prostheses are to one another.
Majority of the software used in this research were open source and/or free as of 2021. The development of SPINS as an open-source platform entailed various issues of hardware calibration, wireless connectivity errors, transfer latency, cloud corruption and bugs within the CAD workflow. The methods applied to solve the major issues faced are highlighted in Supplementary A, section 5 and were all resolved prior to data collection. The challenges involved, along with the steep learning curve28 and possible input errors are likely reasons why such workflows are seldom explored10,21,23,29 in maxillofacial prosthetic dentistry. However, the large community support for open-source16, free biomedical service initiatives6 and recently established reliability of Blender28 and Meshmixer4,29 in prosthetic dentistry show promise of an economically viable maxillofacial prosthetic digitisation alternative. Autodesk Recap, although not open-source, was used to evaluate the viability of cloud-based photogrammetry initiated off a personal computer. Open-source platforms like Meshroom and VisualSFM can carry out the same functionalities as Autodesk Recap if dealt by a capable machine with Computer Unified Device Architecture (CUDA)30.
Since the digital parameters in this study were quantified through software and without human intervention, errors in measurement were considered to be minimal31. Thus, the large value deviations within the samples were likely due to the different model shapes and defect sizes that were simulated. Similar variations in volume were also found in Abdullah et al.’s study of skull models32. Emphasising on a single defect location or size would not be an accurate clinical representation as patients present with palatal defects of varying shapes and sizes, and no two defects are the same25.
The complex concaved architecture of the human palate was accurately recreated by 3-matics while constructing the prosthetic bulb. However, the authors could not reproduce that exact shape with OS/F which instead produced a flattened outer surface (Fig. 5). This flattened surface resulted in the reduction of surface area but raised the internal volume, thus creating an interpoint discrepancy when compared to 3-matics derived prostheses. Table 2 Thus, Sets B and C exceeded the mean HD acceptability threshold (0.5 mm). Although discrepancies were also found on the inner surfaces of the bulbs in Set C, these minimal differences were likely carried over from SPINS. Leon et al.33 explained that inadequate or unevenly distributed illumination affect mesh accuracies in 3D photogrammetry and solid-from-motion (SFM) scans which is eventually reflected on the surface of the 3D models. These minimal differences can be resolved by improving controlled illumination as well as increasing the number of images taken per cycle (> 24).
Visual comparison of proprietary and OS/F workflows on Set A (left) and Set B (right). (a) Right lateral surface, (b) left lateral surface, (c) inner surface, (d) outer surface.
In the current study, SPINS was compared directly to a laser scanner instead of intraoral 3D scanners. intraoral scanners are handheld devices capable of recording the oral environment in real time and do not rely on generating physical cast models34. The technology reportedly demonstrated varying degrees of accuracy in recording dentulous and edentulous arches35,36. Furthermore, the art of capturing and rehabilitating palatal defects with oral scanners alone is fairly new, have caveats, and are mostly discussed through preliminary reports or case descriptions34,37,38. Various reports also suggest that an additional ionizing/magnetic medical scan (CT, CBCT or MRI) is required alongside intraoral scans to appropriately record the defect undercuts12,38,39,40. Aside from the obvious radiation hazards posed by these medical scans41, the high proprietary costs of dental intraoral scanners as well as the required investments in CT/CBCT-based imaging technology must also be considered. Howbeit, as oral scanning technology is gradually receiving wider acceptability with updated features, it will be imperative to compare the accuracy of SPINS to intraoral scanners in the near future.
While the current technique does not bypass the primary step of impression taking, it can offer a number of affordable smartphone-centric digitisation alternatives for rural service providers who may not have access to state-of-the-art facilities. When paired with a centralised cloud computing platform, remote clinics/academic centres can adopt digital maxillofacial record keeping, commence remote consultation by referring to the 3D casts, promote patient-oriented distance-learning for students and researchers of prosthetic rehabilitation and aid non-profit organisations to feasibly render digitised maxillofacial prosthetic services to cancer patients.
This research was limited to an in-vitro simulation of possible palatal defects on hard dental casts and therefore did not account for soft tissue variations. Future research recommendations for SPINS development include virtual validation against intraoral scanners, physical cast model validations and in-vivo studies of 3D printed templates and subjecting them to various clinically applicable conditions.
