Resveratrol stereoselectively affected (±)warfarin pharmacokinetics and enhanced the anticoagulation effect
Resveratrol (RVT) has various beneficial bioactivities and popularly used as a dietary supplement. RVT showed inhibitions on CYP1A2/2C9/3A4, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), and some conjugated metabolites of RVT also inhibited BCRP. (±)Warfarin, an anticoagulant for cardiovascular disease but with narrow therapeutic window, were substrates of CYP1A2/3A4(R-form), 2C9(S-form) and BCRP. We hypothesized that the concurrent use of RVT might affect the metabolism and excretion of warfarin. This study investigated the effect of RVT on the pharmacokinetics and anticoagulation effect of (±)warfarin. Rats were orally given (±)warfarin (0.2 mg/kg) without and with RVT (100 mg/kg) in a parallel design. The results showed that RVT significantly increased the AUC0−t of S-warfarin and international normalized ratio. Mechanism studies showed that both RVT and its serum metabolites (RSM) inhibited BCRP-mediated efflux of R- and S-warfarin. Moreover, RSM activated CYP1A2/3A4, but inhibited CYP2C9. In conclusion, concomitant intake of RVT increased the systemic exposure of warfarin and enhanced the anticoagulation effect mainly via inhibitions on BCRP and CYP2C9.
Resveratrol (RVT), a polyphenolic stilbene constituent (chemical structure shown in Fig. 1) in grapes, berries and peanuts, etc., has shown various bioactivities, such as antioxidation1, anti-inflammation2 and antiaging3. Owing to the benefits of RVT and grape extract to human cardiovascular diseases4,5,6, RVT is nowadays a popular dietary supplement. Although RVT was believed to be harmless to healthy individuals7,8, it showed inhibitions on metabolic enzymes such as CYP1A2, 2C9, CYP3A49 and transporters such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp)10, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP)11. Furthermore, RVT enhanced the ototoxicity of cisplatin in rats12 and increased the anticoagulation effect of warfarin in mice13. Therefore, we suspected that concurrent use of RVT might affect the pharmacokinetics of various medicines, and probably result in alteration of the efficacy and safety of critical drugs. 
Chemical structures of resveratrol (a), R-warfarin (b) and S-warfarin (c).
Warfarin, an important anticoagulant, has been widely prescribed to treat patients with cardiovascular diseases such as deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, but with narrow therapeutic window14. In clinical practice, the anticoagulation effect of warfarin is routinely maintained by frequent monitoring the international normalized ratio (INR) to ensure the safety and efficacy of treatment. Warfarin was administered in a racemic form consisting of equal amounts of R- and S-warfarin (chemical structures shown in Fig. 1)15. S-warfarin was 2.7–3.8 times more potent than R-form16. In pharmacokinetic aspect, S-warfarin was mainly metabolized by CYP2C9, whereas R-warfarin was metabolized by CYP1A2 and CYP3A415,17,18. About 80% of an oral dose of warfarin was excreted in urine19. Recently, warfarin was verified as a substrate of BCRP20, an efflux transporter locating at the apical side of intestine 21 and proximal tubule22.
In regard to the metabolic fate of RVT, extensive and rapid transformation to its glucuronides and sulfates was reported23. Among the metabolites, RVT glucuronides were substrates of BCRP24, in addition, resveratrol-3-glucuronide, resveratrol-3-sulfate and resveratrol-di-sulfate were inhibitors of BCRP25. We herein hypothesized that RVT and its conjugated metabolites might inhibit the BCRP-mediated efflux transport of warfarin at intestine and proximal renal tubule. Therefore, this study investigated the effect of concomitant intake of RVT on the pharmacokinetics and anticoagulation effect of warfarin in rats. Furthermore, the underlying mechanisms were clarified via in vitro and ex-vivo approaches.
The HPLC chromatogram of powder extract revealed a satisfactory resolution (Supplementary Fig. 1) of RVT and methylparaben (internal standard). Quantitation result indicated that the capsule powders contained 985 mg/g of RVT.
The plasma concentration–time profiles of R- and S-warfarin in rats after oral administration of warfarin alone and coadministration of RVT at 0.5 h before warfarin are shown in Fig. 2a,b, respectively. The pharmacokinetic parameters of R- and S-warfarin after two treatments are listed in Table 1. The results showed that coadministration of RVT significantly increased the AUC0−24 of both R-warfarin and S-warfarin by 58.6% and 48.8%, respectively. The AUC0−t of S-warfarin was significantly increased by 42.1%, whereas the increase of R-warfarin by 55.1% did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.07).
Mean (± SEM) plasma concentration–time profiles of R-warfarin (a) and S-warfarin (b) after oral administration of warfarin alone and co-administration with RVT (100 mg/kg) at 0.5 h before warfarin dosing. Each group included 8 rats.
Figure 3 shows the INR-time profiles of rats after a dose of warfarin alone and with a dose of RVT before warfarin. The INR measured at 24 h after warfarin dosing of rats treated with warfarin alone (1.73 ± 0.18) was significantly lower than that of rats coadministered with RVT (2.64 ± 0.21).
Mean (± SEM) INR—time profiles after oral administration of warfarin (0.2 mg/kg) alone and co-administrations with RVT (100 mg/kg) at 0.5 h before warfarin. Each group included 8 rats. **p < 0.01.
After enzymatic hydrolysis and quantitative analysis by HPLC, the result indicated that the RSM prepared from rats contained 1.9 μM of RVT and 57.9 μM of RVT sulfates/glucuronides.
The cell viability of MDCKII-BCRP was not affected after 1-h incubation with RVT (100 μM). The relative intracellular accumulations of R- and S-warfarin after incubation with and without RVT or Ko143 (10 μM) are shown in Fig. 4a, b, respectively. The results showed that 50 μM and 25 μM of RVT significantly increased the intracellular accumulations of R-warfarin by 90.0% and 74.3%, respectively, and 50 μM, 25 μM and 3 μM of RVT significantly increased the intracellular accumulations of S-warfarin by 77.0%, 61.7% and 30.0%, respectively. As a positive control, Ko143 (10 μM) increased the intracellular accumulations of R- and S-warfarin by 55.6% and 53.7%, respectively.
Effect of RVT on the intracellular accumulation of R-warfarin (a) and S-warfarin (b) in MDCKII-BCRP cells. Data expressed as mean ± SD.*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
The cell viability of MDCKII-BCRP was not affected after 1-h incubation with RSM (onefold serum concentration). The relative intracellular accumulations of R- and S-warfarin after incubation with and without RSM (onefold serum concentration) or Ko143 (10 μM) are shown in Fig. 5a, b, respectively. The RSM at onefold serum concentration significantly increased the intracellular accumulation of R- and S-warfarin by 22.4% and 28.5%, respectively. As a positive control in onefold blank serum metabolite, Ko143 significantly increased the intracellular accumulations of R- and S-warfarin by 17.7% and 42.5%, respectively.
Effect of RSM at onefold serum concentration on the intracellular accumulation of R-warfarin (a) and S-warfarin (b) in MDCKII-BCRP cells. Data expressed as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
Figure 6 showed that RSM at onefold serum concentration significantly decreased the activity of CYP2C9 by 15.7%, conversely, the activities of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 were significantly increased by 66.8% and 144.5%, respectively. The inhibition effects of CYPs inhibitors were partially blocked by the blank serum but remained significant (Supplementary Fig. 2). ANF (10 μM), SFZ (30 μM) and KTZ (30 μM) significantly decreased the activities of CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 by 85.1%, 47.5% and 41.2%, respectively.
Effects of blank serum (control) and RSM at onefold serum concentration on the activities of CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4. ANF, α-naphthoflavone, a positive control of CYP 1A2 inhibitor; KTZ, ketoconazole, a positive control of CYP 3A4 inhibitor. SFZ, sulfaphenazole, a positive control of CYP 2C9 inhibitor. Data expressed as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
In the present pharmacokinetic study, our results showing that a single dose of RVT given prior to warfarin significantly increased the AUC0−24 of both R- and S-warfarin indicated that RVT increased the absorption of both enantiomers of warfarin. As to the total systemic exposure, the AUC0−t of S-warfarin was significantly increased by 42.1%, but the increase of AUC0−t of R-warfarin by 55.1% did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.07), which might be due to insufficient animal number.
The results of pharmacodynamic study showed that a single dose of RVT given prior to warfarin significantly elevated the INR of rats at 24 h post warfarin dosing, revealing that RVT increased the anticoagulation effect of warfarin, that echoed the result of a recent study in mice13. Importantly, our above-mentioned pharmacokinetic study could explain the enhanced anticoagulation effect by increased systemic exposure of S-warfarin, the more potent enantiomer.
Whether the increased anticoagulation effect was arisen from RVT itself? Although RVT had been reported to disrupt the coagulation by inhibiting the aggregation of platelets23,26, INR was not affected in the RVT-fed mice13. In order to confirm this fact, 4 rats were given 7 repeated doses of RVT (100 mg/kg, thrice daily) and our result showed that RVT alone did not increase the INR (Supplementary Table 1), indicating that the increased INR in this interaction study was not due to the bioactivity of RVT itself. We in turn speculated that RVT increased the anticoagulation effect of warfarin through pharmacokinetic interaction.
Concerning the mechanisms underlying RVT–warfarin pharmacokinetic interaction, our in vitro results showing that RVT significantly increased the intracellular accumulation of R- and S-warfarin in MDCKII-BCRP cells indicated that RVT inhibited the BCRP-mediated efflux transport of R- and S-warfarin. Moreover, RSM at onefold serum concentration likewise increased the intracellular accumulation of R- and S-warfarin, indicating that RSM like RVT inhibited the BCRP-mediated efflux transport of R- and S-warfarin. Taken together, both RVT and RSM inhibited BCRP, which might lead to decreased excretion of warfarin at gut lumen and proximal renal tubule.
Regarding another probable mechanism concerning CYPs, although previous in vitro studies had shown that RVT inhibited CYP1A227, CYP2C9 and CYP3A49,28, we considered these results could not be extrapolated to in vivo situation because of the extensive metabolism of RVT23. Therefore, we had prepared RSM from rats in order to mimic the major molecules interacting with CYPs in the enterocytes and hepatocytes. Characterization of RSM indicated that the major molecules were the glucuronides/sulfates of RVT (57.9 μM), and the parent form of RVT was very minor (1.9 μM, about 3%). The evaluation of modulations on CYPs showed that RSM inhibited CYP2C9, the major metabolic enzyme of S-warfarin, but activated CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, the major metabolic enzymes of R-warfarin, indicating that the intake of RVT exerted opposite modulations on the metabolism of R- and S-warfarin. Accordingly, our results clearly revealed that the pharmacokinetic influence of RVT on (±)warfarin was stereoselective. The inhibition of RSM on CYP2C9 could in part account for the significant increase of the systemic exposure of S-warfarin. In addition, our study disclosing activations on CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 by RSM were apparently opposite to the reported inhibition by the parent form of RVT9,28.
Taken together, our mechanism studies showed that both RVT and RSM inhibited BCRP, in addition, RSM inhibited CYP 2C9, but activated CYP 1A2 and CYP 3A4. Therefore, the increased systemic exposure of S-warfarin could be accounted for by the decreased BCRP-mediated excretion and inhibited CYP2C9-catalyzed metabolism, which exerted synergistic effect and might lead to bleeding.
Despite of various health benefits of RVT, warfarin-treated patients should be cautious for the hidden risk of bleeding when taking RVT as a dietary supplement. We suggest that patients taking long-term medications, especially high-alert medicines with narrow therapeutic window should be aware of the probable interactions between RVT and drugs.
In conclusion, concomitant intake of RVT increased the systemic exposure of warfarin and enhanced the anticoagulation effect mainly via inhibitions on BCRP and CYP2C9.
