Logic programming reveals alteration of key transcription factors in multiple myeloma
Innovative approaches combining regulatory networks (RN) and genomic data are needed to extract biological information for a better understanding of diseases, such as cancer, by improving the identification of entities and thereby leading to potential new therapeutic avenues. In this study, we confronted an automatically generated RN with gene expression profiles (GEP) from a cohort of multiple myeloma (MM) patients and normal individuals using global reasoning on the RN causality to identify key-nodes. We modeled each patient by his or her GEP, the RN and the possible automatically detected repairs needed to establish a coherent flow of the information that explains the logic of the GEP. These repairs could represent cancer mutations leading to GEP variability. With this reasoning, unmeasured protein states can be inferred, and we can simulate the impact of a protein perturbation on the RN behavior to identify therapeutic targets. We showed that JUN/FOS and FOXM1 activities are altered in almost all MM patients and identified two survival markers for MM patients. Our results suggest that JUN/FOS-activation has a strong impact on the RN in view of the whole GEP, whereas FOXM1-activation could be an interesting way to perturb an MM subgroup identified by our method.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplasm of plasma cells with an incidence rate of approximatively 5/100,000 in Europe. The median survival of MM patients has improved substantially over the past decade. Owing to the establishment of high-dose therapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation as a routine procedure, significant improvements in supportive care strategies, and the introduction and widespread use of the immunomodulatory drugs thalidomide and lenalidomide, and the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Nevertheless, almost all MM patients ultimately relapse, and new drugs and new combinations for the treatment of MM are warranted. MM is a heterogeneous disease at both the clinical and molecular levels. Recent large scale genomics analysis based on the landscape of copy-number alterations and on whole exome sequencing have revealed the hallmarks of genetic changes in MM such as hyperdiploidy, translocations involving the IgH locus, and mutations in the RAS/MAP and NF-kB pathways and in TP531. These genetic changes as well as gene-expression profiling (GEP) have been widely used in the molecular classification of newly diagnosed patients to define diagnostic entities and identify promising new therapeutic targets2,3,4,5,6,7. However, at present a standard of classification based on subgroups that could be targeted therapeutically is still being debated. Clearly, there is a need for innovative tools to improve the identification of the prognostically relevant entities, clinically and biologically, in newly diagnosed MM patients. It is tempting to use the mutational spectrum based on whole-exome sequencing as a gold standard; however we have previously shown that a large number of exome mutant alleles are not expressed clinically or biologically8. In addition, exome sequencing may miss potential driver mutations in the non coding regulatory elements known to affect enhancer activity, which thereby affect the transcriptional program9; therefore GEP remains a tool of choice. However, GEP alone is limited and must be integrated with innovative approaches that use biological regulatory networks to extract biological information relative to gene expression datasets to provide significant clues about the etiology of myeloma.
During the past decade, many methods of so-called pathway analysis or active pathways detection have been developed. These methods use as a knowledge base a biological pathway or regulatory network, that compiles a series of molecular phenomena that lead to activation (or inhibition) of gene expression, a cell product such as a hormone, or a physical modification of the cell. Regulatory network information is currently available through databases such as Gene Ontology (GO)10, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)11, the Pathway Interaction Database (PID)12, Wikipathway13, Transfac14, and Causal Biological Networks (CBN)15. The main objective of pathway analysis methods is to confront or integrate GEP data with regulatory networks or pathways to distinguish two or more classes of cells (e.g. healthy vs ill) from GEP data by inferring a specific signature for each class. We can identify three principal categories of approaches that have been used to associate GEP with specific pathways16.
The Over-Representation Analysis (ORA) group of approaches17, 18 includes approaches that are based on differentially expressed (DE) genes. These approaches score single pathways based on the proportion of DE genes (identified with statistical tests or with a threshold) contained in each pathway. In most cases, these methods use a hyper-geometric test17 to score each pathway. Moreover, the majority of ORA approaches that use functional annotation (GO) or pathway maps (KEGG) consider the consequences of the DE genes (leading to the differentially expression of proteins) in the associations between gene and pathway. Martin et al.19 called this type of reasoning forward assumption compared to the backward assumption
18, which considers the causes of those DE genes in the gene-pathway association.
The Functional Class Scoring (FCS) group of approaches uses the full datasets without any pre-selection, allowing integration of the effects of low gene expression variations in the identification of the pathways involved. FCS approaches can use forward20, 21 or backward22, 23 reasoning. Although these methods improve the problem of genes selection, the pathways in which individual genes are involved are still studied independently. Moreover, the position of the genes in the topology is not used in the analysis.
The Pathway Topology (PT) approaches are very similar to the FCS approaches, but in addition, they score genes according to the pathways to which they belong. Whereas some of these approaches only include interactions between genes24,25,26,27, others consider different types of relationships between genes19, 28, generally activation and inhibition. The majority of methods study each pathway independently. Within this group, we can also identify methods that use both forward24,25,26,27 and backward19, 28 reasoning.
In this work, we propose to integrate the GEPs obtained from myeloma cells (MC) of 602 MM patients and from normal plasma cells (NPC) of 9 healthy donors with the whole compendium of the PID-NCI public pathway repository so as to better understand the mechanisms of plasma cell carcinogenesis. To integrate this data, we first automatically build a directed (and labeled) graph using the whole compendium of the PID-NCI public pathway repository. This graph connects signaling pathways to the transcription of the genes in the GEP dataset. We then integrate the graph with the expression data by reasoning on its logic using IGGY29, a tool based on logic programming (Answer Set Programming) that confronts a node coloring (GEP) with labeled and directed graphs. Our combined approach could be considered to fall within the PT category since it takes into account the causality and activation/inhibition logic of graph edges. However, unlike previous methods, it uses a global logic to analyze experimental and pathway data. In this formalism, both forward and backward modes are included as reasoning modes (causes-consequences). IGGY allows us to check the consistency of the information and to generate predictions based upon automatic repairs for upstream non-measured species. It uses DE data as well as the identically expressed genes across classes (invariant genes) in its analysis. The proposed method does not correlate protein activation with gene expression; the two entities are identified separately in the graph. The non-measured protein activations necessary to satisfy the GEP according to the entire pathway database topology are used later to propose a signature for each dataset profile. This global signature can be used to characterize the dataset classes. Moreover, our model also allows us to in silico quantify the effect of perturbations on this global pathway for each single patient. We show how this type of method, which combines large-scale information in terms of number of patients, the complete GEP, and the entire compendium database, can be applied to identify new specificities of MM disease compared to normal cells. As a result, we inferred information on the states of specific proteins in the cell that may cause these disorders, and we identified specific markers of MC compared to NPC that can be used to identify survival markers. Furthermore, these markers can be studied as therapeutic targets because of their over-representation and their impact on the involved pathways.
The NCI-PID integration allowed us to find 634 genes (a protein preceded by a transcription event). Independently, our discretization method (Supplementary Material, Figure S1) proposed observations {+, −, 0} on microarray probes corresponding to 15,418 proteins identified in Uniprot. Merging both lists allowed us to identify 557 genes present in the NCI-PID and observed as over/underexpressed or invariant in our GEPs. Variant and invariant genes are distributed across the MC and NPC datasets (Table 1). By extracting the downstream events from three signaling pathways (IL6/IL6-R, IGF1/IGF1-R and CD40)31 to the variant genes, we generated an induced subgraph from NCI-PID containing 2,269 nodes, 2,683 edges and connecting 529 variant genes. This graph was then compacted to a new graph with 596 nodes and 960 edges (Fig. 2) and composed of 529 observed nodes (genes) and 67 unobserved nodes, including 23 proteins, 33 complexes, 2 biological processes, 9 proteins reactions (translocation, phosphorylation, etc.).
Representation of the subgraph obtained from the PID-NCI database. CD40, IL6 and IGF1 (the nodes in the top portion of the graph) are the 3 queried pathways. The 529 genes that are differentially expressed across all profiles are merged for this representation in the node “Gene set”. The 5 top-ranked nodes according to their FS are labeled in bold type and colored in yellow. We used the same syntax for all nodes in this study. The edges from the “Gene set” node to proteins have been deleted for the sake of clarity.
The confrontation between the data and the graph topology allowed us to predict the node signs for each dataset (Table 1). To validate our predictions, we compared the precision of the predictions with that of the randomized data. In this case, we used 50% of the measured genes {+, −, 0} to predict the other half of the genes for each sample; we performed the same process after randomizing the data and repeated this computation up to 1000 times. We obtained two sets of precisions (Fig. 3; Supplementary Material, Table S1). A two-tailed t-test yielded a p-value lower than 2.2e–16. This shows the efficiency of our prediction method in comparison with random precision.
Precision distribution of our method with real observed and randomized data.
To identify MC subgroups, we applied a decision tree algorithm to the presence/absence value of a sign prediction (see Methods section). This result is illustrated in Fig. 4. It shows that the combination of the assignments (JUN/FOS[n], −) and (FOXM1*[c], −) is associated with the majority of MC (73%) and that the method can distinguish MC from NPC. JUN/FOS[n] represents the protein complex composed of JUN and FOS, which is located in the nucleus, whereas FOXM1*[c] represents the FOXM1 protein, which is phosphorylated and located in the cytoplasm. The full node syntax is given in Fig. 2. Moreover, we can identify another important group of MC (13%) that is characterized by the presence of (JUN/FOS[n], −) and the absence of (FOXM1*[c], −) and (SRC*, −). Similar results were obtained using a random forest classification (Supplementary Material, Figure S7).
Decision tree based on predicted node-sign assignments.
To characterize the shared specificity for all MC, we computed the frequency scores (FS) for our predictions (see Methods section). The complete list of the FS obtained is shown in Table S2 of the Supplementary Material. In Table 2, we show the 5 best p-values associated with a Fisher test with FS

MC
 > FS

NPC
. For these assignments, we checked the number of input/output variant genes connected to each node in the graph (Table 2, column connectivity). We observe that inhibition of the complex JUN/FOS[n] is predicted for 95.6% of MC. The activity levels of FOXM1*[c] and STAT6*[c] were predicted to decrease. This decrease, in terms of protein activity, is correlated with the level of gene expression in 76% and 93%, respectively, of the MC datasets. The FS classification identified the presence of (Src*, +) as an interesting marker for MC datasets. Interestingly, the decision tree approach identified the absence of (Src*, −) as distinguish MC datasets that were previously characterized by (JUN/FOS[n], −) and (FOXM1*[c], −). Both the machine-learning and statistical methods identified (JUN/FOS[n], −) and (FOXM1*[c], −) as important markers of MC datasets. In Fig. 2, we show (marked as yellow nodes) how these 5 main proteins or protein complexes appear connected following the PID-NCI representation.
The FOS and JUN proteins form a heterodimer complex that is responsible for AP-1 activity. This activity is known to play a role in tumorigenesis because it has been implicated in the induction of apoptosis, in the promotion of cell survival and in proliferation. The classification methods showed that (JUN/FOS[n], −) is the best assignment to distinguish MC from NPC and revealed that AP-1 activity is lower in almost all MM patients than in normal controls. Inspection of individual patients’ subgraphs showed predominantly underexpression (65% of the observed expression in MC) of the proapoptotic protein BIM (Supplementary Material, Figure S8). These results are in agreement with the results of in vitro studies demonstrating that in myeloma cell lines IL6 protects against apoptosis via AP-1 inactivation39.
FOXM1, a transcriptional factor known to be associated with MM, has been studied as a therapeutic target44. Based on the graph reduction and on our reasoning model, FOXM1*[c] is equivalent to FOXM1*[n] and is representative of the FOXM1 transcriptional activity. Firstly, we analyzed FOXM1 gene expression in the MC groups in which FOXM1 activity was predicted. We found that decreased FOXM1 activity is associated with reduced expression of the FOXM1 gene (Fig. 5, left). Since our model identified a subgroup of patients with decreased activity of FOXM1 and since decreased expression of FOXM1 is associated with superior survival (Supplementary Material, Figure S9), we wanted to know whether FOXM1 activity could impact survival. We compared overall survival (OS) in both predicted groups in the larger cohort of patients that received comparable treatment (Velcade-dexamethasone induction followed by high-dose melphalan and autologous stem cell transplantation; n = 450) (Fig. 5, right). A log-rank test between these groups yielded a p-value of <0.1, allowing us to conclude that low FOXM1 activity is associated with a trend towards better survival.
(Left) Gene expression of FOXM1 among MC datasets with or without the prediction (FOXM1*[c], −). (Right) Overall survival (OS) of patients with prediction (FOXM1* [c], −) or without prediction (FOXM1* [c], −).
Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards analyses were performed on the cohort of 450 MM patients who received comparable treatment to determine the relative prognostic values of the 201 couples combining unobserved nodes and all signs (+, −, 0) and the three strongest known prognostic variables in MM (Table 3); these were the translocation of chromosomes 4 and 14 (t(4;14)), the deletion in the short arm of chromosome 17 (del(17p)) and serum 2-microglobulin ≥5.5 mg/L (β
2-microglobulin) for OS determination51. In the multivariate analysis, estimation of hazard ratios for death indicates that both (G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle, −) and (RB1/E2F1-3/DP[n], +) were independent powerful prognostic factors (Supplementary Material, Figure S10).
The multivariate model with the known prognostic parameters shows that these factors increase the log-likelihood from −515.16 (null model) to −496.62 (3 parameter model), with p-significance <10−7 (null model vs 3 parameter model) whereas the parameters (G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle, −) and (RB1/E2F1-3/DP[n], +) increase the log-likelihood from −496.62 (3-parameter model: AIC3p = 999.2) to −486.90 (5-parameter model: AIC5p = 983.8) with p-significance <10−4 (3-parameter model vs 5-parameter model) and <10−10 (null model vs 5-parameter model). Therefore, we can conclude that the 5-parameter model provides more prognostic information than the 3-parameter model (AIC5p < AIC3p and p5p vs 3p <10−4). In term of the global increase in the log-likelihood between the null model and the 5-parameter model, the specific impact of the selected pairs represents more than 34% of the total.
From the computation of all in silico node perturbations (see Methods section), we evaluated the impact of perturbing the key nodes found with the FS method (Table 4). A unilateral Fisher test allowed us to evaluate the significance of each perturbation compared to the NPC datasets. We can see that the activation of JUN/FOS generates a top-ranked (10% top) score of conflicts and therefore repairs 74.6% of the MC datasets, whereas it repairs only 22.2% of the NPC datasets. Interestingly, in vitro JUN overexpression in MM cell lines results in cell death and growth inhibition41. A similar tendency (more conflicts in MC than in NPC) is observed when FOXM1 is activated, but the difference cannot be considered significant. Nonetheless, we note that of the 36.4% of profiles in which the activation of FOXM1 is top-ranked, 96.8% correspond to patient profiles with the prediction (FOXM1*[c], −) (Supplementary Material, Table S3). For the other proteins and complexes, we can see that the difference between MM and NPC is not significant. It is worth noting that the p-value of a perturbation that goes in the opposite direction of the prediction shown in Table 2 is in all cases lower than the one of a perturbation which goes in the same direction of the prediction.
Our method incorporates both differential and similar expressions in its reasoning. All pathway analysis methods reviewed in the Introduction use the difference in gene expression between the two classes of subjects to extract the specific signatures. The similarity of expression between classes is not used in the ORA and FCS approaches because these methods base their analyses on the differential expression of genes. The PT approaches reviewed use only differential gene expression in their reasoning. We believe that adding information on similar expression enables us to better capture cellular behavior. The results of the precision analysis using a two-sign coloring model tend to support this hypothesis. Our method differs from classic pathway analysis methods in that it incorporates the notion of automatic reasoning. Within the context of MM, we are able to automatically detect repairs. These repairs are specific for each GEP and could represent cancer mutations, regulatory network incompleteness or experimental errors. The graph used in this study contains 529 genes; we can therefore observe the strong connectivity that exists among PID pathways since the total number of genes in the PID is 634. This strong connectivity is important for methods such as ours that are able to reason on the information content of the whole database. We observe, however, that the number of genes connected to cancer pathways in PID is far below the total number of human genes. This underrepresentation of regulatory knowledge is an important limitation of PID. Apart from this fact, PID-NCI includes important modeling information that identifies transcription events. This information allows us to separate gene expression from protein activity. These two parameters are not necessarily correlated, especially in cases involving phosphorylated proteins or complexes such as JUN/FOS.
Our analysis of the predictions made by the method allowed us to identify nodes associated with a sign specific to MC compared to NPC datasets. Among these assignments, we found the inhibition of JUN/FOS[n] and FOXM1*[c]. These proteins are known to be involved in cancer in general52, 53 and in hematological malignancies in particular43, 44. In the case of FOXM1, we showed that this transcription factor can represent a survival marker when its activity decreases. We can draw a parallel with the bibliography, which identifies the activation of the FOXM1 pathway as a risk factor. For JUN/FOS, our analysis identified this pathway as a potential therapeutic target but not as a survival marker. We observed that inhibition of the associated pathways has been already identified in MM patients39, 41 and in patients with other cancers. Moreover, this pathway is targeted in some therapeutic approaches38, 40. We identified two couples that improve classical prognostic models. In the case of the first couple, (G1/S transition of the mitotic cell cycle, −), we can associate this node with the proliferation pathway. The computed prognostic model showed that the prediction of inhibited proliferation can be a protective factor for MM patients. The second node, (RB1/E2F1-3/DP[n], +), was also identified as a protective factor by the 5-parameter model. This complex is known to be involved in the RB pathway, which influences cell growth pathways by regulating the initiation of DNA replication. This pathway is usually altered in cancer, leading to a loss of function54, and current therapeutic approaches aim to activate this pathway55.
Using the in silico node perturbation method, we were able to estimate the effect of perturbing a node within a particular dataset (i.e. single patient cancer cell). This method represents a powerful tool for analyzing the consequences of perturbations of oncogenic pathways in a given patient, especially as in-vitro experiments are limited due to the small amount of viable myeloma cells that are obtained after bone marrow aspiration. The results of this in silico analysis show that activation of JUN/FOS[n] had a significant impact on 75% of MC profiles; all of these JUN/FOS[n] = “+” sensible MC profiles had the prediction (JUN/FOS[n], −). In addition, activating FOXM1*[c] had a significant impact on 36.4% of the profiles; 96.8% of the FOXM1*[c] = “+” sensible MC profiles had the prediction (FOXM1*[c], −). The difference in the percentages of JUN/FOS[n] and FOXM1*[c] can be explained by the graph topology and the connectivity of the individual nodes. JUN/FOS[n] is connected to eight genes through a distance of 1 molecular species (Supplementary Material, Figure S8); therefore, perturbing JUN/FOS[n] will impact these genes directly since they are strongly constrained by the sign of JUN/FOS[n]. On the other hand, FOXM1 is connected to 529 genes through longer paths through distances of from 4 to 77 molecular species. These genes may have other predecessors that are independent of FOXM1; this could explain why activation of FOXM1 has a strong effect on only 37% of the MC profiles. Overall, we think that this in silico method could be used to reinforce the choice of a therapeutic target for a specific patient profile.
