Vagal reactivation after a cardiac rehabilitation session associated with hydration in coronary artery disease patients: crossover clinical trial
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-89840-x
This study aimed to investigate the hydration influence on the autonomic responses of coronary artery disease subjects in the immediate recovery period after a cardiovascular rehabilitation session, in view of the risks of a delayed autonomic recovery for this population. 28 males with coronary artery disease were submitted to: (I) Maximum effort test; (II) Control protocol (CP), composed by initial rest, warm-up, exercise and passive recovery; (III) Hydration protocol (HP) similar to CP, but with rehydration during exercise. The recovery was evaluated through the heart rate (HR) variability, HR recovery and by the rate of perceived exertion and recovery. The main results revealed that the vagal reactivation occurred at the first 30 s of recovery in HP and after the first minute in CP. A better behavior of the HR at the first minute of recovery was observed in HP. The rate of perceived exertion had a significant decrease in the first minute of recovery in HP, while in CP this occurred after the third minute. In conclusion, despite an anticipated vagal reactivation found at HP, these results should be analyzed with caution as there were no significant differences between protocols for all variables and the effect sizes were small.
Subjects with coronary artery disease (CAD) present an autonomic modulation impairment characterized by a decreased vagal activity and a sympathetic hyperactivity1, which is related to a risen risk of ischemic events, and a higher mortality rate2. Thus, the insertion of this population in cardiac rehabilitation programs (CRP) is essential, as physical exercise promotes positive modifications in the autonomic modulation3.
Despite the well-known physical exercise benefits, and although the rate of occurrence of major cardiovascular events during cardiac rehabilitation in stable patients is very low4,5, the post-exercise period represents a vulnerable state of the cardiovascular system, in which arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden death may occur6,7. During the early recovery phase, the autonomic nervous system (ANS) plays a central role in the cardiovascular deceleration, by rapidly decreasing the heart rate (HR) through vagal reactivation within the first minutes of recovery8. However, due to the sympathetic hyperactivity related to CAD, the vagal reentry is delayed in this population9. Thus, the HR, the cardiac workload and the myocardium oxygen consumption remain higher for a longer period, which favors the appearance of sudden events during the recovery10.
Given the risks related to a delayed vagal reactivation and HR reduction, the study of strategies capable of promoting a more efficient recovery on this population immediately after exercise is essential, as a faster recovery is related to a lower risk of sudden events2 and may contribute to the safety of CRP.
Considering that the fluid loss due to transpiration11 can negatively influence the ANS12 and directly affects the baroreflex mechanisms, contributing to the slower HR recovery after the exercise13, the fluid intake has been suggested as a strategy to accelerate the immediate14,15,16,17 and long-term18,19,20 autonomic and HR recovery after exercise. However, this topic has only been studied in healthy populations.
Thus, we highlight the importance of studying the influence of hydration in CAD subjects. Since this technic can be easily implemented in CRP as a strategy to decrease post-exercise risks, opening an important field of research in clinical practice, that may influence the current techniques used in these programs.
Considering these aspects, the study aimed to investigate the influence of hydration in the autonomic modulation of CAD patients, through HR recovery and HR variability, at the immediate recovery period of a cardiac rehabilitation session. Also, as secondary outcomes, its influence in the rate of perceived exertion, discomfort and recovery.
In total, 31 subjects were recruited (Fig. 1). After sample losses, 28 subjects were analyzed (Table 1).
Protocol design.
The body mass, axillar temperature, and urine specific density values are presented in Table 2. A significant reduction of the body mass was observed at the end of CP (0.345 ± 0.121 kg). Significant differences between the protocols for axillary temperature and specific density were not found.
The RMSSD30 during the early recovery period was compared with the values at rest (Fig. 2b) and at the end of the exercise (Fig. 2a), to address the parasympathetic return to the rest values and the vagal reactivation, respectively. For both analysis, there were no significant differences between the protocols (2a: pvalue = 0.671; η2P = 0.003—small effect size/2b: pvalue = 0.791; η2P = 0.001—small effect size) and at the moments vs protocols interaction (2a: pvalue = 0.610; η2P = 0.012—small effect size/2b: pvalue = 0.469; η2P = 0.016—small effect size). However, there were differences between the moments (2a: pvalue < 0.001; η2P = 0.267—large effect size/2b: pvalue = 0.001; η2P = 0.237—large effect size).
Comparison of RMSSD30 at exercise (a) and initial rest (b) and comparison between HRpeak and HR1 and HR2 (c). Legend: M1 = last 30 s of initial rest; M2 = last 30 s of exercise; M3 = 0–30 s, M4 = 30–60 s, M5 = 60–90 s, M6 = 90–120 s of recovery; HRpeak heart rate at the peak of exercise, HR1 heart rate after 1 min of recovery, HR2 heart rate after 2 min of recovery. *Difference between exercise (a)/initial rest (b) and recovery on control protocol (pvalue < 0.001); #Difference between exercise (a)/initial rest (b) and recovery on hydration protocol (pvalue < 0.05).
For the HR analysis (Fig. 2c), no significant differences were found between the protocols (pvalue = 0.583; η2P = 0.013—small effect size) and at the moments vs protocols interaction (pvalue = 0.305; η2P = 0.021—small effect size). However, between the moments significant differences were found (pvalue = 0.001; η2P = 0.781—large effect size).
In the CP significant differences between HRR1 (11.11 ± 6.57) and HRR2 (14.40 ± 5.41; pvalue < 0.0001; Cohen’s d = 0.55—medium effect size) were observed. However, for HP there were no differences between HRR1 (13.18 ± 8.02) and HRR2 (14.41 ± 6.60; pvalue = 0.132; Cohen’s d = 0.17—small effect size). Comparisons of HRR1 and HRR2 between the protocols showed no significant statistical differences (HRR1: pvalue = 0.237; Cohen’s d = 0.28—small effect size/HRR2: pvalue = 0.554; Cohen’s d = 0.00—small effect size).
The results of the 5 min analysis of SDNN, RMSSD, LF, HF, LF/HF are presented in Table 3. There were no statistical differences between the protocols.
For the RPE and RPR (Fig. 3), there were no significant differences between the protocols (RPE: pvalue = 0.302, η2P = 0,020—small effect size; RPR: pvalue = 0.390, η2P = 0.014—small effect size) and for the moments vs protocols interaction (RPE: pvalue = 0.360, η2P = 0.018—small effect size; RPR: pvalue = 0.743, η2P = 0.005—small effect size). However, for the moments, differences were observed for both scales (RPE: pvalue = 0.001, η2P = 0.519—large effect size; RPR: pvalue = 0.001, η2P = 0.607—large effect size).
Mean and standard deviation for the rate of perceived recovery (a) and exertion (b) scale in both protocols. Legend: Rec 1 = 1st minute of recovery; Rec 3 = 3rd minute of recovery; Rec 5 = 5th minute of recovery; Rec 7 = 7th minute of recovery; Rec 10 = 10th minute of recovery; Res = initial rest; Ex 15 = 15th of treadmill exercise; Ex 35 = 35th minute of treadmill exercise; RPR rate of perceived recovery; RPE rate of perceived exertion. *Difference between Rec 1 and other moments of recovery (a)/initial rest and recovery (b) of control protocol (pvalue < 0.001); #Difference between Rec 1 and other moments of recovery (a)/initial rest and recovery (b) of hydration protocol (pvalue < 0.001).
The results revealed that the hydration did not promote significant differences between the protocols for the vagal reactivation, autonomic modulation recovery, RPE, and RPR after a moderate-intensity session of exercise. However, small anticipation of vagal reactivation, autonomic modulation recovery, and RPE was observed when the hydration protocol was performed.
It is reported that hypohydration/dehydrated states promote a linear increase in body temperature40. However, it was not observed in the present study. This suggests that the exercise model used in CRP, even without fluid replacement, does not promote significant hypohydration/dehydration, which contributes to the safety of these programs, considering the deleterious effects of dehydration in the cardiovascular system. However, the hydration strategy used in our study was efficient to avoid fluid losses, as the body mass did not change in the HP.
The analysis of the RMSSD30, a marker of the parasympathetic modulation30, demonstrated the physiological gradual increase of vagal activity during recovery8. In the HP, the vagal reactivation may have occurred sooner, since, after the first minute of recovery, the RMSSD30 was no longer significantly different from the rest and, at the first 30 s of recovery the parasympathetic modulation was significantly higher than at the exercise. In the CP, the RMSSD30 did not return to the rest values and only became significantly higher than the exercise after the first minute of recovery. However, these results should be analyzed with caution due to the non-significant difference between the protocols and small effect sizes.
After exercise, the decrease of HR depends on the vagal reactivation8. The higher HRR1 observed at HP, even without significant difference between protocols, suggests a small acceleration of the parasympathetic reactivation at HP, in accordance with the RMSSD30 results. The low HRR1 and high HRR2 in the CP evidence a slower HR recovery when the volunteers did not ingest water. This response was not observed in HP, where HRR1 was as high as HRR2. Also, this faster HR reduction could explain the faster reduction of the RPE after exercise with water intake, since it is reported that the RPE scale correlates to the HR37.
The HRV indexes analyzed in 5-min windows had a physiological and similar response in both protocols. The significant increase of SDNN, which represents the global modulation at REC1 and its return to the rest value at REC2, in both protocols may be related to the vagal reactivation, evidenced in this study through the RMSSD30. In addition, the passive recovery in the orthostatic position for 10 min was insufficient to promote the total recovery of the parasympathetic modulation, even with the hydration.
This is the first study to investigate the influence of hydration in the immediate autonomic recovery of CAD subjects. This topic was previously studied in health and young males, who ingested 500 ml of water in a single dose immediately after moderate and high-intensity exercises14,15,17 and had a positive effect on the vagal reactivation and autonomic modulation recovery.
However, in our study, the volunteers ingested an individualized amount of water in fractionated doses throughout the exercise, as suggested by the American College of Sports Medicine23. The total amount of water ingested was 0.345 ± 0.11L, which was sufficient to avoid the fluid losses and, even if not significant, it promoted small anticipation of the recovery. However, if it is enough to minimize the appearance of sudden events during the recovery period is still an aspect that needs to be further studied.
Furthermore, another factor that may be responsible for the low effect of the hydration strategy used in our study is the exercise intensity proposed. The exercise in our experiment was performed bellow the anaerobic threshold, that classifies it as low-moderate intensity26, and it is known in the literature that, in healthy and young subjects, the higher the exercise intensity, the higher the sweating rate, fluid losses40, and the cardiovascular41 and autonomic12 perturbations. Thus, this aspect may justify the low effect of the hydration in the vagal reactivation, HRR and RPE.
As a study limitation, the randomization of the protocols was not possible because the amount of water ingested was obtained by assessing body mass loss after the CP. However, all participants were familiar with the proposed exercise protocol, so we believe that the exercise model performed in the study did not influence the outcomes analyzed.
Despite the small and non-significant effects between protocols found in the present study in the immediate recovery period of a cardiac rehabilitation session, the investigation of new hydration strategies capable of accelerating the recovery in CAD subjects is important and should be encouraged, since those individuals present an autonomic impairment1 and have a less efficient recovery after exercise. Therefore, from our preliminary results, new studies that include larger samples and that insert randomization of different hydration strategies during exercise, can be designed. In addition, it may be interesting to analyze a longer recovery period to understand the impact of hydration strategies on the autonomic behavior in the recovery period of CAD patients.
