Neural activations associated with feedback and retrieval success
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41539-017-0013-6
There is substantial behavioral evidence for a phenomenon commonly called “the testing effect”, i.e. superior memory performance after repeated testing compared to re-study of to-be-learned materials. However, considerably less is known about the underlying neuro-cognitive processes that are involved in the initial testing phase, and thus underlies the actual testing effect. Here, we investigated functional brain activity related to test-enhanced learning with feedback. Subjects learned foreign vocabulary across three consecutive tests with correct-answer feedback. Functional brain-activity responses were analyzed in relation to retrieval and feedback events, respectively. Results revealed up-regulated activity in fronto-striatal regions during the first successful retrieval, followed by a marked reduction in activity as a function of improved learning. Whereas feedback improved behavioral performance across consecutive tests, feedback had a negligable role after the first successful retrieval for functional brain-activity modulations. It is suggested that the beneficial effects of test-enhanced learning is regulated by feedback-induced updating of memory representations, mediated via the striatum, that might underlie the stabilization of memory commonly seen in behavioral studies of the testing effect.
A substantial number of behavioral studies have demonstrated that repeated testing enhances learning and retention of to-be-learned material more than restudy, a phenomenon known as the testing effect.1,2,3 This effect has been observed after shorter, as well as longer retention intervals. Cognitive theories suggest that the mnemonic benefits of test-enhanced learning can be attributed to enhanced memory strength,4,5,6 and that feedback is a critical factor.7,8,9,10 Feedback with the correct answer improves learning as the additional study opportunity prevents retrieval failures and errors from being repeated,8,11 and supports maintaining correct responses over consecutive tests.12 However, despite substantial behavioral evidence for a key role of feedback, little is known about the underlying neuro-cognitive processes for feedback effects on test-enhanced learning (see ref. 13 for a review).
It has been suggested that testing strengthens memory either by “filtering out” irrelevant representations during retrieval practice6 or by updating contextual representations.14 In a related vein, neurocomputational models15,16 suggest that updating of task-relevant information is related to fronto-striatal interactions, where the striatum acts as a gating mechanism that regulates input of task-relevant information to the prefrontal cortex (PFC). More recently it has been suggested that the same fronto-striatal mechanism supports the selection of maintained representations in PFC that will be successfully retrieved (i.e. output gating,17,18). Thus, in line with psychological explanations for the testing effect, striatum could critically account for how initial testing strengthens memory by supporting selective updating and subsequent selection of appropriate responses available within WM during effortful retrieval.17,19,20

Abundant research has stressed the importance of striatal activity during declarative retrieval success,20,21,22,23,24,25 with striatal activity increasing as a function of increased task difficulty,24,26,27 but with a rapid decrease over the course of successful learning.28 Moreover, neuroimaging studies have provided evidence for the ventral striatum (VS) as important in tracking positive outcomes following a modified retrieval strategy,29 suggesting that new learning after feedback (i.e. shifting from retrieval failure to success) might be strengthened by striatal recruitment during subsequent successful retrieval.30

Few imaging studies have investigated the testing effect (see ref. 13 for a review), but select studies have reported evidence for striatum being more active during testing compared to study,31,32 but none reported learning-related changes across consecutive tests. Here, we hypothesized that one potential mechanism by which repeated testing with feedback strengthens memory is via fronto-striatal interactions.20

We used an event-related fMRI paradigm to track neural responses during repeated testing with correct answer feedback. We scanned young healthy participants while they were learning Swahili–Swedish word-pairs across three consecutive cued-recall tests with feedback (hereafter denoted as T1, T2, and T3). Data were analyzed in relation to both the feedback event and the retrieval event across repetitions (see section “Methods” for details). To minimize expectancy feedback, test items with feedback [correct target word] were uniquely interspersed with test items without feedback [¤¤¤]. We expected higher activity in the hippocampus27,33 for feedback compared to no feedback, and, in line with fMRI studies examining the potentiated effects of testing on successful re-encoding,34,35 higher activity in insula following a retrieval failure compared to a retrieval success when feedback was present. Moreover, to the extent that feedback has a positive impact on learning,7,8,9,10,11 our primary aim was to investigate its effect upon subsequent retrieval trials.12 In line with prior research, we expected higher striatal activity for successfully retrieved items compared to failures20,21,22,25 and reduced fronto-striatal activity as a function of consecutive successful retrievals, likely reflecting less need for executive control functions.24,26,27

Mean proportion of response correctness for items judged as “know and correct” at T1 was 0.34 (SE = 0.05), at T2, M = 0.61 (SE = 0.06), and at T3, M = 0.69 (SE = 0.06) indicating that feedback significantly enhanced learning across the three consecutive tests. A one-way repeated ANOVA showed a significant learning effect across the three repetitions for items judged as “know and correct” [F(2,42) = 87.28, MSE = 0.08, p < 0.001, n
2
p = 0.81], and pairwise comparisons confirmed a significant improvement over each consecutive test (between T1 and T2, p < 0.001 and between T2 and T3, p = 0.003). The participants did not have a sufficient number of trials (for the purpose of fMRI analyses) that were unsuccessfully retrieved at T1 and T2, but successfully recalled at T3, so T3 was therefore not included in the fMRI analysis.
A 2 (retrieval outcome; success versus failure) × 2 (test; T1, T2) ANOVA was conducted. There was a significant retrieval outcome by test interaction, [F (1, 72) = 26.91, p < 0.05 (family-wise error (FWE))], with the strongest effect in the bilateral VS (see Fig. 1a, b). Significantly elevated activity was seen at the first successful retrieval (at T1 or T2) in bilateral VS [−10 10 −4 and 14 2 −8], in a right mid-frontal region [46 54 18], left inferior frontal triangularis [-46 26 20], the left brainstem [mesencephalon, −2 −26 −4], and two small clusters in left parietal cortex [−46 −52 46] extending into left angular gyrus [−36 −50 36]. As can be seen in Fig. 1a, b, for items successfully retrieved on T1, as well as T2 and T3 (Rc+++), these regions were strongly active at T1 along with subsequent activity reduction on T2 and T3. By contrast, for items unsuccessfully retrieved at T1 but successfully retrieved at T2 and T3 (Rc-++), the reversed pattern was evident with an activity increase from T1 to T2 followed by a marked reduction from T2 to T3. Notably, while this effect may partly be attributed to a retrieval success effect per se, the influence of feedback critically affected the change in outcome from T1 to T2 for the Rc-++ items.

a, b The significant interaction effect for the retrieval event. a Brain regions showing different activation during the retrieval event related to retrieval success in the left and the right hemisphere: bilateral VS [−10 10 −4; 14 2 −8] and brainstem [−2 −26 −4]. b Signal change in the BOLD signal during feedback related to retrieval success. Error bars denote ±1 s.e.m. Note: The third test (T3) was not included in the 2 × 2 ANOVA, but for illustrative purposes the T3 results are illustrated in Fig. 2b

To identify regions associated with feedback per se, we contrasted all events associated with feedback [correct target word] versus no feedback [¤¤¤] independently of response correctness at T1. Feedback elicited greater activity than no feedback in the left hippocampus (HC, BA 28), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG, BA 44 and 47), middle/superior temporal lobe (BA 21 and 37), inferior/superior parietal lobe, and bilateral insula (BA 48; see Table 1). The reversed comparison, no feedback > feedback, yielded no clusters significant at the statistical threshold.
The critical comparison concerns differences in brain activity at the feedback event in relation to retrieval success (Rc-++ versus Rc+++). A 2 (retrieval outcome; success versus failure) × 2 (test; T1, T2) ANOVA was conducted to examine whether the BOLD signal change during feedback was related to subsequent retrieval success in T2. No significant interaction effects above the predefined statistical threshold were found, but at a more lenient threshold (p < 0.001 uncorrected at the voxel level, k ≥ 5), significantly higher activity at T1 was found for Rc-++ items in several bilateral frontal regions compared to Rc+++ items (see Fig. 2a, b). Thus, following retrieval failure, activity in several PFC regions (but not VS) was markedly elevated at the time of feedback, possibly reflecting re-encoding, whereas no such effect was seen at the feedback event following successful retrieval.

a, b The interaction effect for the feedback event. a Brain regions showing differential activation during feedback related to prior retrieval success in the left and the right hemisphere. b Change in the BOLD signal during feedback related to retrieval success. Error bars denote ±1 s.e.m. The activations were identified at a more lenient statistical threshold (p < 0.001 uncorrected at the voxel level, k ≥ 5). Note: The third test (T3) was not included in the 2 × 2 ANOVA, but for illustrative purposes the T3 results are illustrated in Fig. 3b

Compared with the extensive behavioral evidence for test-enhanced learning as superior to a study only condition, and feedback as critical for the effect, little is known about the neuro-cognitive processes underlying these behavioral outcomes. Here we used fMRI to track brain responses during repeated testing with feedback. The first goal of the study was to investigate brain regions in relation to feedback. Feedback may be seen as a new learning opportunity. In line with that notion, increased hippocampal activity was found for feedback compared to no feedback, and learning from feedback was related to increased activity in the insula. A second goal was to examine how the retrieval activity was modulated by feedback. We found strong VS activity during the first successful retrieval, but marked decrease over consecutive tests. Thus, we provide novel evidence that feedback strengthens test-enhanced learning, predominantly via the VS.
While some prior imaging studies, explicitly investigating the testing effect, have found the striatum to be more strongly activated during testing compared to study,31,32 we here extend those findings by showing that striatal recruitment during testing is specifically related to retrieval success. A similar activity pattern across consecutive tests was seen in bilateral frontal regions and in a region within the brainstem. Higher activity in these regions was only found at the first retrieval success trial, independently of when it occurred (T1 or T2), and the response showed a marked decrease as a function of subsequent successful retrieval trials.
Whereas our VS regions fell within the retrieval success network identified in a recent meta-analysis,25 the modulation of the VS response can also be understood in terms of cognitive demands.24,27 For example, striatum along with PFC supports cognitive-control mechanisms needed during declarative memory retrieval, and the modulation of fronto-striatal activity is positively related to the degree of cognitive effort needed to successfully retrieve the target.20,24,26,27 Mimicking our results, the ability to correctly respond during high memory load has been associated with the right middle frontal region found in our study.36 As for the left frontal region, a multimodal study combining fMRI and SPECT provided evidence for that activity in left VLPFC was positively associated with striatal D2 binding during updating of long-term memory representations.23 The latter finding corresponds well with a recent high-resolution fMRI study in which brainstem dopamine phasic signals mediated updating of contextual representations into working memory.37 As indicated by our significant retrieval success interaction effect, we also found evidence for a region within the brainstem that followed the same activity pattern as the fronto-striatal regions. D’Ardenne and colleagues37 used high-resolution fMRI, and the location of our brainstem region seemed to overlap with their observations (see also refs. 38,39,40 for related reports).
There was a marked decrease in the BOLD response from the first to the second successful retrieval trial. We suggest that one possible explanation for this pattern of results is related to memory demands during selective updating of contextual representations during the learning phase. At T1, no feedback had been introduced and more cognitive control was needed to update potential candidates that will be selected and subsequently retrieved. At T2, this updating procedure was less demanding since irrelevant representations had been “filtered out” at T1. When the retrieval attempt at T1 failed, but became successful at T2, this led to updating of the relevant representations. Subsequently, as indicated in Fig. 1b, less updating processes were needed at later successful retrieval trials. This account corresponds well with the cognitive explanations of how test-enhanced learning strengthens memory across consecutive tests.6,14 Further evidence for this notion comes from both neurocomputational models15,16,41 and neuroimaging studies, which have provided evidence for an interplay between midbrain, frontal, and striatal regions during selective updating of relevant information into working memory37,42 and long-term memory.43

We know from a wealth of literature that testing is not a neutral event, but an active process that changes memory. The basic idea with test-enhanced learning—“test yourself during initial learning”—implies that the knowledge level is generally low, and hence that the inclusion of feedback is a critical factor to support improvement in learning. Direct comparison of feedback versus no feedback revealed elevated activity for feedback in mainly left lateralized regions in the hippocampus and fronto-temporo-parietal cortical regions, which extend previous studies.27,33 In contrast to behavioral studies,12 which have implied that feedback strengthens initial correct responses accompanied by low confidence, the current study failed to demonstrate such an effect. Instead, feedback played little, if any, role after the first successful retrieval. One explanation for the inconsistent findings might be related to the fact that we only included “know and correct” responses (i.e. high-confident responses), as too few items received “believe and correct” responses (i.e. low-confident responses). In addition, our results are in agreement with those of Pashler and colleagues,8 which showed that even if feedback more than doubled retention compared to test with no feedback, feedback following a correct response made little difference independent of response confidence.
Despite substantial evidence for the VS as important during feedback,44 no differential VS activation was found at the time of the feedback event. Feedback in our paradigm was defined as the correct target word (not positive versus negative feedback), and thus more likely serving as a re-encoding event rather than reward per se. In line with this reasoning, and in agreement with our findings of insula activity change during feedback following retrieval failures, neuroimaging studies investigating the potentiated effects of testing on successful re-encoding have provided evidence for insular activation during re-study,34,35 with higher activity following a retrieval failure.34

Whereas a substantial number of studies have demonstrated that test-enhanced learning is superior compared to a diversity of other pedagogical methods,45 few studies have investigated its efficiency in relation to individual differences in cognitive proficiency (e.g. working memory46,47). It has been shown that test-enhanced learning might be equally beneficial independent of individual variations in working memory capacity47 and even recognized as especially beneficial for those with lower working memory capacity.46 These results are of educational significance, and consistent with the results of the current study showing that test-enhanced learning taxes executive processes early in the learning phase but less executively demanding so as a function of improved learning. Future studies are needed to further explore the efficiency of test-enhanced learning in relation to individual variations in cognitive proficiency. This is an important issue given that we want to transform the science of learning into educational practice.
In conclusion, the present findings suggest that feedback strengthens test-enhanced learning via the striatum.
