Multimodal Phenotyping of Alzheimer’s Disease with Longitudinal Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Cognitive Function Data
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) varies a great deal cognitively regarding symptoms, test findings, the rate of progression, and neuroradiologically in terms of atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). We hypothesized that an unbiased analysis of the progression of AD, regarding clinical and MRI features, will reveal a number of AD phenotypes. Our objective is to develop and use a computational method for multi-modal analysis of changes in cognitive scores and MRI volumes to test for there being multiple AD phenotypes. In this retrospective cohort study with a total of 857 subjects from the AD (n = 213), MCI (n = 322), and control (CN, n = 322) groups, we used structural MRI data and neuropsychological assessments to develop a novel computational phenotyping method that groups brain regions from MRI and subsets of neuropsychological assessments in a non-biased fashion. The phenotyping method was built based on coupled nonnegative matrix factorization (C-NMF). As a result, the computational phenotyping method found four phenotypes with different combination and progression of neuropsychologic and neuroradiologic features. Identifying distinct AD phenotypes here could help explain why only a subset of AD patients typically respond to any single treatment. This, in turn, will help us target treatments more specifically to certain responsive phenotypes.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. It is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with cognitive decline and atrophy seen on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain1. It has become a major public health concern because of its increasing prevalence, chronicity, caregiver burden, and high personal and financial costs of care2.
AD is clinically very heterogeneous, varying between patients in terms of cognitive symptoms, test findings, and rates of progression3. It also varies neuroradiologically in terms of atrophy on MRI Memory deficits, caused by pathological changes in structures of the medial temporal lobe4,5, are typically regarded as the earliest and most salient symptom of AD6,7, but this is not invariably the case8. Instead, patients may present with visuospatial or language disturbance, or apraxia9, likely reflecting regional differences in the underlying neuropathology8,10,11,12. It can also present as a single area of cognitive impairment without a change in activities of daily living, in which case this prodromal AD is referred to as mild cognitive impairment, or MCI.
Several recent treatment trials for AD have shown efficacy in a subset of patients, but not all patients. We hypothesize that there are subsets of AD patients who respond differently to treatments. Furthermore, we hypothesize that these subsets may correspond to different AD phenotypes revealed by analyzing the clinical and MRI variability in AD presentation.
Recent advances in computational phenotyping methodologies have introduced data-driven phenotyping of AD and related dementias. This computational approach is automated and non-biased, high-throughput, and can handle vast amounts of noisy healthcare data13,14,15. One method has examined patterns of cortical atrophy on brain imaging to suggest AD subtypes16. Others have used factor analysis and hierarchical clustering to group AD patients according to cognitive features8. Statistical analysis using mixed effects models and multiple linear regression is used to confirm association between cognitive visual rating scales and neuroradiologic subtypes17. So far, none of the previous research on phenotyping uses both neuroradiologic features from imaging and neuropsychological features from cognitive tests. This lack of multi-modal view motivated us to develop a novel multi-modal computational phenotyping model that integrates neuroimaging and cognitive features. We hypothesize that by combining these two sources of data, phenotyping outputs for neurodegeneration of AD would be more robust. We also focused on longitudinal progression of neuroimaging and clinical assessments because AD is a progressive disease and understanding the neurodegeneration is the main outcome of interest in AD research3. Therefore, our objective is to develop and use the computational phenotyping method for multi-modal analysis of changes in cognitive scores and MRI volumes of AD patients to test for there being multiple AD phenotypes.
In this study, the computational phenotyping method is based on coupled nonnegative matrix factorization of brain volume loss and deteriorated cognitive dysfunction, together with separating regularization in terms of disease stage (Fig. 1). The phenotypes are defined as a set of decreased brain regions and decreased cognitive function with different weights or membership values. Subjects also have multiple phenotypes with different membership values.
Workflow from Data Preprocessing to Interpretation of Phenotypes. NPT = Neuropsychological tests. R = the number of phenotypes. (1) Prepare data: We analyzed the longitudinal changes between two visits in the brain volume of each brain region and the NPT scores. Brain volume changes were M: = Δ Brain volume = Brain volume at visit 2 – Brain volume at visit 1. NPT score changes were X: = Δ NPT score = NPT score at visit 2 – NPT score at visit 1. (2) Group using matrix factorization: We derived phenotypes as a set of associated brain regions and cognitive dysfunction. Brain volume changes M is decomposed into V (subject’s membership) and Y (brain region’s membership). NPT score changes X is decomposed into V (subject’s membership) and W (cognitive task’s membership). We used coupled nonnegative matrix factorization to harmonize the two information. (3) Sep arate the groups by multi-label support vector machines: We encouraged the V (subject’s membership), Y, and W to reflect subject’s disease stages (AD, MCI, and CN). The matrix factorization and the support vector machines are jointly optimized. (4) Define phenotypes: We analyzed clinical relevance of the cognitive dysfunction and related brain volume loss.
From Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, we included AD, MCI and cognitively normal (CN) subjects that have eligible imaging sessions and clinical assessments (Table 1). 857 subjects in the ADNI dataset had more than one imaging session that occurred at least six months apart. AD, MCI, and CN subjects showed different longitudinal progression (Table 2) and transitions from MCI or CN to AD (Supplementary Table S1). Informed consent was obtained for all subjects, and the study was approved by the relevant institutional review board at each data acquisition site (for up-to-date information, see http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/themes/freshnews-dev-v2/documents/policy/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List%205-29-18.pdf). All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
After deriving R = 30 phenotype candidates, we selected four representative phenotypes. We first filtered out less discriminative 21 phenotypes based on statistical significance, i.e., p-value of multivariate logistic regression on classifying AD and/or MCI vs CN (Supplementary Table S2) and distribution of AD, MCI, and CN subjects who have high membership values to the phenotypes (Figure S1). Note that the membership values refer to the amount or weight that the subjects, brain regions, or tasks contribute to define the phenotype. The phenotype membership values are analogous to the membership in fuzzy clustering. To confirm the discriminative performance of selected phenotypes with respect to the disease stages, we compared coefficient and p-value of logistic regression assuming that the phenotypes are used as predictors to predict disease stage (either AD vs MCI; MCI vs CN; or AD/MCI vs CN) at visit 1. Note that, although the time duration between two visits varied depending on the disease stage, the time duration was taken into account in the logistic regression model to cancel out the bias effect of different duration. We also examined the number of disease stage transitions between two visits using confusion matrix (Supplementary Table S3). With the remaining 9 phenotypes we reviewed their related cognitive function, brain regions, and biological variables and selected four phenotypes with distinct characteristics. The four phenotypes showed distinct cognitive decline pattern (Table 3). Each phenotype had a set of brain regions that show significant volume loss and/or cognitive function that shows increase in severity.
The objective of this study was to develop and validate a multi-modal phenotyping method to test the hypothesis that there are identifiable AD phenotypes that are based on progressive loss of brain regions and associated loss of cognitive functions.
We developed a phenotyping method using coupled nonnegative matrix factorization with a supervised support vector machines regularizer and shrinking regularizer. We compared the interpretability and discriminability of the phenotyping method with baseline models. Using this method, we derived phenotypes that consist of relevant brain regions and cognitive functions that show similar longitudinal loss.
The produced phenotypes in this study do show that subtypes of ADNI patients decline in cognitively distinguishable ways. Phenotype 1 is characterized chiefly by a decline in the ability to recall words on cognitive testing, which is a common hallmark of AD and one of the ways AD patients can be functionally differentiated from those that are cognitively normal18. However, there were also declines in the volume of the caudal anterior cingulate gyrus and in the ability to write checks or pay bills. The anterior cingulate gyrus has been shown to be associated with motivation, decision making, cost-benefit calculations, and conflict and error monitoring19. While no studies to date have correlated certain instrumental activities of daily living with specific aspects of cognition, motivation and recognition of consequences are both theoretically involved in the act of paying bills.
The areas of decline of the AD patients in Phenotype 2 most closely resemble that of logopenic progressive aphasia, a form of language-deficit dementia most commonly attributed to an underlying Alzheimer’s pathology. This particular disease subtype is marked mainly by gradual loss in the ability to repeat phrases or name objects, however single-word comprehension is normally conserved20. And while single-word comprehension is spared, understanding longer phrases and sentences is significantly more difficult for logopenic patients. Comprehension of longer sentences requires patients to retain more information to process, and thus is impaired because of the short-term memory loss that is common in AD. In Phenotype 2 the ADAS and MMSE criteria that decline in between the visits for these patients are all associated with naming objects, word repetition, and comprehension. Orientation deficits were also clustered in Phenotype 2, and are not unexpected given the association of AD with degeneration of the parietal lobe. This is interesting due to the proximity of the parietal lobe to Wernicke’s area in the temporal region which is often involved in language comprehension difficulties as well. This pattern of decline may suggest that the decline over the two-year period involved the posterior medial temporal lobe as well as the parietal lobe21. Patients in Phenotype 2 appeared to decline in cognitive areas more related to language, orientation, and comprehension. Scoring of several areas of cognition within this phenotype showed decline across the board in executive, visuospatial, language, and orientation. This is not unexpected considering the communication difficulty when trying to assess patients with language disorders. Other areas of cognition can appear to be reduced because a patient may not understand test instructions or be able to answer properly. This has been a common criticism of tests such as the MMSE in the past22. In fact, it was expected that patients with strong language decline over the two year period would test as having global cognitive decline.
The criteria clustered in Phenotype 28 include a mixture of Phenotypes 1 and 2 in regards to the decline in orientation and an inability to balance a checkbook. Significant global impairments in cognitive function were noted in other examinations of this group suggesting that specific changes may be masked by language dysfunction as well, matching that of Phenotype 2. Examination of molecular markers between the three groups did not display a conclusive relationship although Phenotypes 2 and 28 both saw increases in amyloid-beta in cerebrospinal fluid. The significance of this finding is unknown as amyloid-beta quantities have been historically used for diagnosis of AD rather than progression23. CSF phosphorylated tau and total tau have also not been shown to be associated with Alzheimer’s severity24.
Phenotype 4 was shared by 99.9% of patients analyzed in this study. Its inclusion of AD, MCI, and CN patients suggests that it may represent baseline age-related cognitive decline. Other studies of this same patient database have identified the clustered changes in Phenotype 4 as belonging specifically to Alzheimer’s patients25. Structural degeneration of the clustered areas results in damage to the hippocampal-prefrontal cortex pathway which was also found in other studies of AD patients. A little less than half were diagnosed with AD at the second visit, but all of the clustered patients are associated with these patterns. Moreover, there was no association of these patients with degeneration of the prefrontal cortex which serves as an enhancer of the encoding of memory26. Based on the declining structures clustered in this phenotype, it would be more accurate to say that the pathway between the prefrontal cortex and the areas which do encode working memory as well as the areas themselves were degenerating in Phenotype 4 patients. The specific pattern of degenerating structures suggests that the functional deficits observed in the cognitive testing in this cluster were due to an Alzheimer’s-like pathology, at least according to prior studies of this patient database.
While it is possible that all of the patients in Phenotype 4 are undergoing AD-like changes, it is more likely that this pattern is in fact representative of baseline age-related cognitive changes. A recent study comparing young versus older adult connectomes showed declines in the functionality of this same dorsal prefrontal-attention axis even in healthy elderly patients while executive, orientation, visuospatial, and language areas were spared27. The prevalence of Phenotype 4 suggests that it is a common degenerative pathway in all of this study’s patients, including the cognitively normal ones. Comparisons of the CDR with other phenotypes’ CDRs show that the average CDRs of Phenotype 4 were less than that of the other groups (i.e., weighted t-test’s p-values <0.03 with P1, P2, P28, P21 for both visit 1 and visit2). Less severe CDRs, high prevalence across both healthy and cognitively impaired patients, and the specific pattern of degeneration altogether suggests that Phenotype 4 may represent age-associated decline.
Phenotype 21 had similar types of structural and functional changes to Phenotype 4 although structural changes were weakly clustered. The primary associated features in Phenotype 21 were a decline in performance on the number cancellation test and marked decreases in ideational praxis which represents a decline in visuospatial planning, a cognitive function primarily associated with the parietal lobe28. Parietal atrophy is a recognized feature of a rare variant of non-amnestic Alzheimer’s disease referred to as posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) which involves dysfunction of the occipital and parietal lobes29. Although the relative rarity of PCA suggests that the likelihood that 34.9% of the ADNI patients had this variant is very low, they were experiencing non-amnestic visuospatial cognitive decline. Unaffected measures of memory dysfunction over the two-year period suggests that it is likely that these patients did not have amnestic AD.
A limitation of this study is that the brain’s regional volume loss was less captured in phenotype definitions compared to cognitive task scores. The time between two imaging sessions were different based on the disease stages. Cognitively normal subjects have 4.8 years apart, whereas AD subjects have 1.6 years apart due to active follow up (Table 1). Although we reduced the bias from the time difference when predicting the disease stage as incorporating the difference in the regression model, the phenotype definition itself still contained bias from the time difference. AD subject’s significant brain volume changes might not be observed due to the relatively short time difference, consequently the phenotypes were sometimes defined with only cognitive changes.
The main contribution of this study is to demonstrate that one can derive phenotypes of AD using longitudinal neuroimaging features and cognitive assessments, which are complementary sources of information that follow different distributions. In addition, this study examined changes over time, and was not based on static, initial findings. Prior studies that have developed computational phenotyping methodologies focus on one modality of data source, either on brain imaging16 or cognitive functioning (via NPT scores)8 as cross-sectional studies. To the best of our knowledge, our multi-modal and longitudinal phenotyping method is the first of its kind. This multi-modality allows us to capture phenotypes with various combinations of clinical presentations and neuroradiologic features. The longitudinal approach allows us to compare the progression of clinical presentation and neuroradiologic features. The harmonization of multi-modal and longitudinal approaches into one framework enables us to have a unique perspective on AD phenotyping research in considering both combinations and progressions. Moreover, it has been difficult to understand why only a subset of AD patients typically respond to any single treatment. Identifying distinct AD phenotypes here could help explain those results, i.e. only certain AD phenotypes may be responding to each treatment. This, in turn, will help us target treatments more specifically to certain responsive phenotypes.
