An agent-based algorithm resembles behaviour of tree-dwelling bats under fission–fusion dynamics
Utilization of computational approach in the study of social behaviour of animals is increasing and we attempted such an approach in our study of tree-dwelling bats. These bats live in highly dynamic fission–fusion societies that share multiple roosts in a common home range. The key behavioural component associated with complex and non-centralized decision-making processes in roost switching is swarming around potential locations in order to recruit members to the new roost. To understand roost switching dynamics of bat groups in their natural environment, we employed a computational model, the SkyBat, which is based on swarm algorithm, to model this process. In a simulated environment of this agent-based model, we replicated natural fission–fusion dynamics of the Leisler’s bat, Nyctalus leisleri, groups according to predefined species and habitat parameters. Spatiotemporal patterns of swarming activity of agents were similar to bats. The number of simulated groups formed prior to sunrise, the mean number of individuals in groups and the roost height did not differ significantly from data on a local population of bats collected in the field. Thus, the swarm algorithm gave a basic framework of roost-switching, suggesting possible applications in the study of bat behaviour in rapidly changing environments as well as in the field of computer science.
Group living has numerous energetic and social benefits for animals1,2. The survival rate of bats primarily increases through communal breeding and offspring rearing3. Bats living in social groups depend strongly on the protective function and microclimatic suitability of daily roosts4, with a significant proportion of more than 1400 species worldwide roosting in cavities of trees5,6,7. Maternity groups of most of tree-dwelling bat species change their roosts every couple of days, and the distance between two such roosts may exceed hundreds of metres in a dense forest environment8,9,10,11,12,13,14. While bats have perfect homing abilities and complex spatial orientation15, group membership in tree-dwelling species often alternates after evening emergence3. As a result, these bats live in highly dynamic fission–fusion societies in which they split up and rejoin larger or smaller groups of conspecifics, sharing multiple roosts in the common home range16,17,18,19,20,21.
Tree hollows excavated by woodpeckers or even more ephemeral shelters beneath loose bark provide limited room for maternity groups of tree-dwelling bats, especially considering their rapid doubling in size after the births of pups in midseason5. Therefore, frequent shuffling of adult females and their offspring among groups maintains long-term social relationships within their colony3,22. Tree roost characteristics are in relationship with ambient conditions23, thus roost switching ensures also microclimate that is most conducive to successful reproduction24,25,26. This behaviour also reduces parasites in the cavities, minimizes commutes and competition with other cavity dwellers and protects against predators that can deplete bat colonies if shelters are occupied for a longer time18,26,27,28.
The key behavioural component associated with roost switching and roost-mate recruitment in tree-dwelling bats is a swarming behaviour in which individuals eavesdrop on calls of conspecifics at multiple roosts within the colony home range (In order to make terminology clear, the more common use of the term swarming in bat biology is associated with pre-hibernation mating behaviour. In our case we refer to so-called ‘dawn swarming’29). Colony members perform a set of characteristic flight displays accompanied by social vocalisation and calls with long-distance propagation attributes in front of potential roosting sites, beginning at night and reaching its peak at dawn30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37. This unique behavioural mechanism is believed to drive the collective selection of new roosts from a large set of potential roosting sites. A simplified process of roost switching includes disintegration of the former group during foraging along with an individual search for a roost, swarming around potential locations in order to recruit other members and to select a new roost once the number of gathered mates is acceptable. Thus, roost switching is a multi-factorial task in which each bat evaluates the size of their group, quality of the roost, and remaining time to feed5,36,38.
This decision-making process observed in roost switching in tree-dwelling bats suggests a computational algorithm, a set of rules that defines a sequence of instructions to rule cooperation in a multi-agent system. Modern computational approaches to the study of social behaviour of animals are increasingly used and this emerging field provides many similar agent-based models today39,40,41,42 even in social behaviour of bats43,44,45,46. The first agent-based model that attempted to simulate roost switching in tree-dwelling bats using biologically relevant data was run by Ruczyński and Bartoń38. The model based on predefined assumptions has found that the bats that were successful in finding roosts were mainly those possessing accurate tree discrimination, i.e. the ability to quickly and effectively assess trees for suitability, whereas bats without this ability instead used the tactic of eavesdropping on swarming conspecifics in large groups. Another data-driven modeling of group formation in the fission–fusion dynamics of bats worked on a system of roosts of fixed characteristics with accounted pair-specific social influence47. However, it is questioning how collective decision is made under variable roost conditions and unstable social relationships. Deficiencies of previous models may be solved with the use of the swarm algorithm SkyBat, inspired by fission–fusion societies of bats48,49. Among the unique features of this computational algorithm is the ability to perform group movement without a need of individually specific exploration behaviour and social influence while searching for new targets of interest and hence an ability to perform flexible, non-centralized group decision-making in rapidly changing environments. Thus, the SkyBat model does not emphasise individual tree discrimination ability because tree roosts are ephemeral, and suitability of a cavity may change quickly during the course of season14,18,21,50. Moreover, this model assumes that each bat regardless of its relationships with other members must find a group in a suitable roost within a certain time limit for activity, which enables the algorithm to comprehend and simulate roost switching dynamics of bat groups in their natural environment.
In this study, we aimed to test the robustness of the SkyBat algorithm, specifically its ability to replicate natural fission–fusion dynamics of bat groups in specific conditions. We adjusted the first version of this model48 and fed the algorithm according to the set of basic rules and properties of bat movement, group sizes, roosting preferences and swarming behaviour observed in the field. This led us to simulate roost switching behaviour of tree-dwelling Leisler’s bats, Nyctalus leisleri, in a defined time frame and environment akin to real roosting areas.
Individual movement and spatiotemporal distribution of swarming activity of simulated agents was highly variable (Fig. 3). However, simulated locations of roosts where groups were formed had very similar and often even identical spatial patterns to the locations of roosts observed in the field. For six independent simulations, the robust global S-values ranged from 0.87 to 1.00. Significant differences (P < 0.05) were seldom identified at the local level (Fig. 4). The majority of both simulated and field-observed roosts were located in the areas (hexagonal cells) of the highest density of available tree cavities (Fig. 1b).
Simulated foraging trajectory (small points) and swarming around tree roosts (open circles) of three random agents (bats) during a single night in an area with properties as in Fig. 1. Density plots also denote time when bats were roosting in cavities.
Spatial distribution of tree roosts (red crosses) of maximum groups, which could form from 100 possible agents during the six independent simulations of 120 days each. The number of agents and number of days were set to mimic natural population size of the Leisler’s bat in the area and the length of breeding season, respectively. Distribution of simulated roosts was compared with observed natural roosts (blue crosses) by an area-based nonparametric spatial point pattern test. Red cells of hexagonal grid refer to statistically significant increases (P < 0.05) of the number of simulated roosts, while blue cells refer to decreases (S, robust global index of similarity).
The median number of simulated groups per day was 3 (total range of 1–16 of six independent simulations). The median size of such groups was 22 (1–100) individuals. The maximum group formed at the end of bats’ roost switching activity was about 51 (18–100) individuals. The median roost height was 8.5 (3.5–15.5) meters. Similarly, the roost height of maximum groups was about 8.3 (1.5–15.5) meters. Simulated switching distance had median 49 (range 0–1103) meters (Fig. 5). Simulated group size was in average 1.3–10 individuals smaller comparing to field data (total range of 95% CI was from – 17.5 to 5.8). The mean difference in simulated and observed roost height and switching distance was about 0.2–1.0 m (95% CI from – 0.4 to 1.7) and 58–133 m (95% CI from – 9 to 183), respectively. However, the magnitude of effect size in standardized mean differences between simulated and observed data was assessed as either small or even negligible (Table 1). Similarly to the effect size statistics, rank-based test indicated that simulated group size, roost height and switching distance differed from values observed in the field only seldom (Fig. 5).
(a) Number of groups, (b, c) sizes of groups, (d, e) heights of roosts and (f) the distance between two roosts that were occupied by the maximum group in two consecutive days in the six independent simulations. Simulated data (violin plots show medians and 25–75% quartiles in box with rotated kernel density estimation) were compared with observed data from the natural population (horizontal median line with 25–75% quartiles) if allowed. Significant differences (P < 0.05) by the Mann–Whitney U test are denoted by asterisks.
In the presented agent-based model, both the daily and seasonal patterns of swarming activity of agents resembled bats in their natural environment35,36. Incorporating selected parameters of the species and its environment, the SkyBat swarm algorithm48,49 competently replicated natural fission–fusion dynamics of tree-dwelling bat groups in predefined conditions. The low variation of means of computing data in six independent replications confirmed that the computational algorithm that processed biological input information produced consistent results. The most important outputs, which allowed us to evaluate the characteristics of agents’ fission–fusion behaviour, were the final number of simulated groups formed prior to the end of each simulation cycle (sunrise in the field) and the mean and maximum numbers of individuals in groups with respect to the local population size. This data did not differ significantly from the field data on Leisler’s bats collected during the long-term study in the Gavurky population (Table 1, Figs. 4 and 5).
Agents in the simulations behaved similarly to their biological source of inspiration, as groups selected cavity entrances more than 7.5 m above the ground, significantly higher than the average of available cavities in the study habitat53. For the study species, such roosting strategy suits reduced wing loading and lift-to-drag ratio64. Additionally, this strategy ensures required thermal conditions of roosts due to benefits arising from greater exposure of cavity to sunlight4,24,25 and reduces the risk of predation from the ground10. Furthermore, even switching distance between roosts was very similar to our field observations, and therefore we may consider simulation outputs as entirely plausible. Thus, our study confirmed that this algorithm is able to rule out a flexible non-centralized group decision while resolving multiple individual tasks during roost switching of tree-dwelling bats in a cluttered environment5,36,38. However, besides species-specific modeling of fission–fusion behaviour in bats, a more general implication of our findings could be for understanding of social dynamics that brings together different disciplines in a complex. We may thus study better interactions of individual group members as well the relationship between individual interactions and group level behaviours65.
Utilization of this modern computational approach in the study of dawn swarming behaviour of tree-dwelling bats is largely unknown. We are fully aware of very complex social behaviour and cognitive abilities of bats22, and our pioneering study can illuminate only a basic framework of the dynamic system of roost switching. We also did not account yet for the effect of additional variation in biological information at an individual level (e.g., age, relatedness, fitness, hormonal secretion) and how that data would improve the model, but our case study is vital for understanding the roost switching of bat groups in a rapidly changing environment. Together with changed characteristics of roosts, one of the proximate factors shaping fission–fusion dynamics are indeed ambient conditions as females are more likely to switch roosts at high temperatures while less when it rained23,26. Further, for example, by modelling specific conditions of the species’ forest habitat, one can also predict the response of the local population to logging practice or altered food supply. We therefore suggest that the SkyBat can be employed as a tool for biological conservation.
Results of this interdisciplinary study also suggest possible applications of the algorithm not only in bat ecology but also in the fields of computer science and artificial intelligence. In all fairness, besides other bio-inspired, swarm-based computational algorithms characterized by convergent social phenomena in different animals, a bat algorithm with derivates has already been described66. Although this computational algorithm has the unique ability to solve complex problems67,68,69,70, its formal description was solely inspired by echolocation properties during group foraging. The grouping mechanism in foraging individuals is completely different from group roosting, while group foraging is associated with even less investigated reasons for sociality in bats71,72. The most important features of a swarming algorithm applied in the SkyBat model are its ability to find a solution in a limited time and its independence from the environment and specific relationships among individuals. A derivative of the SkyBat algorithm was successfully tested as a searching algorithm in a field of informatics49. Furthermore, a highly potential candidate for utilization of the SkyBat is swarm robotics, a relatively new bio-inspired approach that aims to coordinate a large number of autonomous robotic agents in searching for specific targets of interest and moving groups from one location to another without a leader73. Thus, the coordination among robotic agents is achieved in a self-organised manner where their collective behaviour is a result of local interactions among them and between them and their environment. This is directly comparable to fission–fusion dynamics in social groups of tree-dwelling bats.
