Understanding mindfulness outcomes: a moderated mediation analysis of high-performance work systems
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-021-00708-x
The purpose of the study was to explain the possible outcomes of mindfulness. The research studied the relationship between mindfulness and employee voice behaviour, affective commitment, job satisfaction, and burnout. The research added one contextual variable, high-performance work system, as a moderator. The sample of the study was faculty members of higher education (management) schools. The sample size was 1092 faculty members. Moderated mediation analysis was used to analyse the data and understand the positive as well as the negative relationship of high-performance work system. Findings indicated the significant positive relationship of mindfulness with employee voice behaviour, affective commitment, and job satisfaction. The research found a negative relationship between mindfulness and burnout. The moderated mediation analysis revealed the significant interaction effect of high-performance work system and mindfulness on consequence variables. To conclude the author found that the mindfulness practice is important for faculty members of higher education. Further the research concluded that mindfulness may enhance employee voice behaviour, which in turn increases satisfaction and commitment and reduces burnout. Such relationship is possible under high performance work system context.
In the past few decades, the topic of mindfulness has become several researchers’ choice of exploration (Langer, 1989; Shapiro et al., 2006; Brown and Ryan, 2003; Wielgosz et al., 2018; Dahlgaard et al., 2019; Atkinson and Wade, 2019). Atkinson and Wade (2019) noted that mindfulness has been studied from various perspectives like; spiritual, religious, first person and third person. It has also been studied under various disciplines like; psychology, health science and neuroscience (Brown and Ryan, 2003; Dahlgaard et al., 2019). However, despite its rising popularity, empirical research pertaining to mindfulness is scarce (Andrews et al., 2014; Dane and Brummel, 2014; Glomb et al., 2011; Hülsheger et al., 2013). Further, there is limited research in mindfulness in the field of management studies, especially considering the business management faculty in higher education (Bennett et al., 2018). Schwind et al. (2017) and Berila (2015) advocated the need to study mindfulness among teachers because of the immediate impact it has on their students and ultimately on the society.
The choice of higher education is based on the premise that the higher education system is experiencing dramatic changes (Knight, 2015; Darvas, 2018), with the nature (quality and qualification) and enrolment size of students becoming demanding. Langer (1998) defined mindfulness after studying it in the higher education context, with the help of three elements; “continuous creation of new categories, openness to new information and an implicit awareness of more than one perspective” (Bush, 2011, p. 188). Further, Langer (1998) and Siegel (2007) state that mindfulness embodies ‘flexible thinking’ keeping ‘present orientation.’ Therefore, as explained by O’Reilly (1998), mindfulness in teaching may be referred to as “being aware, being there, being present, listening and developing inner life by your very attention to the moment” (Bush, 2011, p. 188).
In the context of higher education, mindfulness practice has been reported by Collard et al. (2008), Ramler et al. (2016) and de Bruin et al. (2015). These studies primarily dealt with students’ ability to cope with stress and anxiety, some studies were on maintaining emotional balance and worklife over load leading to burnout (Michel et al., 2014; Glomb et al., 2011). The present research extends these findings and studies the effect of mindfulness on burnout on teachers of higher education. Takeuchi et al. (2009) suggested to study the attitudinal consequence variables (like involvement, commitment and satisfaction) to understand workplace mindfulness, therefore, the current research considered faculty job satisfaction (FJS) and affective commitment (AC) as consequence variables. Tuckey et al. (2018) studied the importance of aligned HR practices to enhance the effect of mindfulness. Studies indicated the importance of system intervention and positive personality traits on individual and organizational outcomes (Eby et al., 2019). HRM interventions have been found to facilitate individual’s personality in achieving positive outcomes (Jiang et al., 2012; Miao and Cao, 2019). System of complementary and aligned HR practices may help in strengthening the mindfulness and outcome variable relationship. There are studies which hence, a bundle of HR practices termed as high performance work system (HPWS) (Miao and Cao, 2019) is considered as moderating variable for the present study.
The paper aims to fill the gap in understanding the impact of mindfulness in the higher education system. It attempts to study its effect on positive organizational behaviour variables like employee voice behaviour (EVB), and positive attitudinal variables like job satisfaction and AC. Further, the presence of HPWS as a moderator may enhance a powerful effect of mindfulness on employee voice behaviour, FJS and AC. It may result in less burnout among individuals.
Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations between variables under study are presented in Table 3. Descriptive statistics helped in understanding the respondent’s characteristics while the intercorrelation matrix provided the direction of the relationship between variables, which formed the base for the exploration of hypotheses.
To test the direct and indirect relationship Hayes SPSS PROCESS macro was used (Hayes, 2013; Preacher and Hayes, 2008). The Hayes macro is useful in testing the mediation model, moderation model and conditional process analysis. The effect of mindfulness was positively related to FJS (β = 0.38; p ≤ 0.01), negatively related to burnout (β = −0.21; p ≤ 0.01), and positively related to AC (β = 0.54; p ≤ 0.01). The findings supported Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Mindfulness was significantly related to EVB (β = 0.62; p ≤ 0.01) and EVB was significantly related to FJS (β = 0.43; p ≤ 0.01), burnout (β = −0.36; p ≤ 0.01), and AC (β = 0.66; p ≤ 0.01) (Table 4).
To further test the mediation relation hierarchical regression analysis was used (Aiken et al., 1991). The indirect effect of mindfulness on FJS (β = 0.21; p ≤ 0.01), burnout (β = −0.09; p ≤ 0.07) and AC (β = 0.27; p ≤ 0.01), were tested and were found to be significant. The significant β values indicated mediation of EVB between mindfulness, FJS, AC and burnout relationship (Table 4). The significance of the indirect effect was further tested using Sobel’s (1982) test. The data was bootstrapped with 5000 replications at a 95% confidence interval. The significant values indicated EVB-mediated mindfulness—FJS (z = 6.13, p ≤ 0.01), mindfulness—burnout (z = −11.01, p ≤ 0.01) and mindfulness—AC (z = 5.12, p ≤ 0.01) relationships. The results supported EVB as a mediator (hypotheses 4a–c).
To test hypothesis 5a–c regarding moderation effect of HPWS, conditional process analysis was. The main effect of mindfulness on FJS (β = 0.12, p ≤ 0.05), burnout (β = −0.17, p ≤ 0.05), and AC (β = 0.25, p ≤ 0.01), and the main effect of HPWS on FJS (β = 0.32, p ≤ 0.01), burnout (β = −0.15, p ≤ 0.05), and AC (β = 0.35, p ≤ 0.01) were weaker than the interaction effect. The interaction effect of mindfulness and HPWS had significant β values on FJS (β = 0.41, p ≤ 0.01), on burnout (β = −0.10, p ≤ 0.05) and on AC (β = 0.30, p ≤ 0.01) (Table 5). The conditional moderating effects of HPWS on mediation relationships were also significant. The bootstrap results indicated confirmation of the findings as the results of confidence intervals did not have a range with zero for mindfulness. The effect size were found to be high and significant for high HPWS in comparison to low HPWS for AC (effect size = 0.112; LLCI = 0.0465–ULCI = 0.009), BO (effect size = −0.10; LLCI = −0.012−ULCI = −0.008) and FJS (effect size = 0.159; LLCI = 0.0652−ULCI = 0.0039). Higher and significant beta values of the interaction effect and significant effect size of conditional moderation, confirmed the moderating effect of HPWS, supporting hypothesis 5a–c. The conditional moderated regression results are presented in Table 6. The interaction effects to confirm moderation are presented in Fig. 2a–c. The slope of the lines indicated that the relationships were stronger for faculty members who experienced greater HPWS than those who experienced lower HPWS.
a Interaction effect of Mindfulness and HPWS on FJS. b Interaction effect of Mindfulness and HPWS on burnout. c Interaction effect of Mindfulness and HPWS on Affective commitment.
Researchers have advocated the influence of positive behaviour on individual outcomes (Dane and Brummel, 2014; Alonderiene and Majauskaite, 2016). Extending similar studies, this study introduced a contextual variable, HPWS, to understand the mechanism involved in changing outcome variables because of the presence or absence of HPWS. The role of teachers have been noted as important in developing student learning and social emotional well-being. Teachers are under pressure because of changing corporate demands and to prepare students for the same, at the same time teachers are also required to cater to students’ requirements patiently. Such environment add to a lot of stress on teachers of higher education, still most of the schools fail to address the concern. Researchers have focused on mindfulness intervention important for students, but studies considering teachers are a few. For the teachers of higher education it is important to understand the degree of mindfulness present among faculty members. Faculty with less indication of such traits may undergo mindfulness intervention for the benefit of self and the management school. Researchers have studied that faculty members with higher trait of mindfulness or having gone through mindfulness awareness program experiences reduced stress, anxiety and burnout.
The study has many significant contributions. First, the paper studied the effect of mindfulness from the perspective of higher education faculty, which has not been reported earlier. It is of significant importance, as several recent studies have reported the occurrence of stress (Andrews et al., 2014; Antony and Valadez, 2002) among faculty members because of non-clarity in self-goal and institute’s long-term direction. Mindfulness that focusses on being at the current state and understanding the difference between controllable and non-controllable factors (Darvas, 2018; Atkinson and Wade, 2019), was an active contributor in the present study. Though age, gender and tenure were control variables, a preliminary analysis was in line with previous findings. Age and tenure were positively related to mindfulness while gender had no effect on mindfulness practices.
The research studied the relationship between mindfulness and job satisfaction. Job satisfaction has been traditionally studied from the extrinsic monetary (pay and reward) perspective (Krueger et al., 2017; Trivellas and Santouridis, 2016). The present research studied job satisfaction with respect to factors like satisfaction with the department, institution, work and whether faculty members would recommend the institute to students or not. The significant relationship between mindfulness and job satisfaction indicates that a faculty member practicing mindfulness would be satisfied with the school at its current state. The respondents indicated that they were neither carrying the institute’s history in their mind nor were did they worry about future conditions to like or dislike the institute. Therefore, the significant relationship is in congruence with the findings of Bachman (1968) and Victorino et al. (2018) who stated the importance of more stable job satisfaction if the awareness and acceptance of the current state are acknowledged.
The study contributed by studying the negative relationship between mindfulness and burnout. The study is in line with the findings of researchers like Wilski et al. (2015) and Bitsadze and Japaridze (2016) who advocated personality characteristics like core self-evaluation and extraversion having a negative relationship with burnout. This led to the need to further explore positive psychological behaviour as antecedents of burnout. Studies have reported imbalance of job demands and resource allocation as a primary reason for employees’ burnout (Salanova et al., 2002; Bakker et al., 2005; Pines, 2017). In the recent past, a growing number of researchers have studied the effect of burnout on affective outcomes like commitment, involvement and satisfaction. Bakker et al. (2005) found the negative effect of burnout on job performance. This study extends the earlier findings and advocates that the psychological states may sometimes be controlled by external factors (job demand, resource allocation or superior support) (Lebares et al., 2018), though it is primarily governed by internal factors like (emotional intelligence, depersonalization and lowered sense of self efficacy) (Maslach et al., 1996). Therefore, the finding advocating a negative relationship between mindfulness and burnout is justifiable. Faculty members practicing mindfulness may experience less burnout because of better emotional and self control.
The third hypothesis regarding mindfulness and AC filled the gap regarding the AC mechanism (Lee and Corbett, 2006; Naeem et al., 2019). If mindfulness results in the desired transformation in faculty members’ day-to-day routine experiences, their AC towards their job will increase. To explain this further, Swanson and Ramiller (2004) distinguished mindfulness and mindlessness and its effect on organizational innovation. To enhance mindfulness employees are trained to focus their attention on exercise (usually breathing exercise) and being aware of every instant. Mindfulness, as explained by Cheung (2018), is divided into three stages: thoughts, sensation and feelings. The feeling level of mindfulness that focuses on immediate and long-term changes in the temperament would influence AC positively (Cheung, 2018). Employees practicing mindfulness would be more emotionally mature and would be affectively connected to the task at hand.
The study of employee voice behaviour as a mediator is another significant contribution to the study. Employee voice behaviour is a positive organizational behaviour while extra-role behaviour has been found to influence individual outcomes significantly (Ng et al., 2014). According to Dyne et al. (2003), employee voice behaviour is a productive form of raising issues, which needs improvement. Given today’s work environment where many millennials work, it is essential for them to know and share information (Frank et al., 2017). As suggested by Good et al. (2016), millennials have access to information, which helps them in constructing their concerns in a structured form and raise the issue. Similarly, the sample of this study that comprises of management faculty are intellectuals who value their profession because of the opportunity to speak and raise concerns constructively. Therefore, in this study, EVB has played a mediating role between mindfulness and outcome variables such as job satisfaction, burnout and AC.
Our study supported the findings of Engemann and Scott (2018), which reported that employees who practice mindfulness would view raising concerns and issues as their responsibility. The creative voice will provide the opportunity to correct the job at hand and improve (Bishop et al., 2004). The gradual improvement in the job will bring job satisfaction. Similarly, Pines (2017) found that employee voice behaviour will facilitate low burnout among faculty members as the higher education system is an example of a flat organization structure where communication flows freely and does not promote hierarchy. The flat, non-hierarchical structure enables employees to voice their concerns without obstructions. At the same time, mindfulness will control the harmful voice behaviour and will minimize the feeling of risk associated with voice behaviour (Oeij et al., 2018), which reduces stress and burnout. Employees are more committed to the job when they are free to raise concerns if required. It goes with an understanding that the one who raises concerns and wishes to correct things, feels positively for the job. Brown et al. (2005) suggested that employees who believe in EVB demonstrate superior engagement and belongingness with the firm, and such employees raise ethical concerns. Therefore, our findings regarding employee voice behaviour contributed to the EVB literature and extended it for the faculty of higher education (management), where autonomy and freedom of expression have been accepted as theculture of an institute (Stupnisky et al., 2018; Schwind et al., 2017).
By studying the contextual moderator variable, HPWS, the study contributes to highlighting the underlying mechanism of the mindfulness–outcome relationship. The study examined the positive and negative interactive effects of mindfulness and HPWS on outcome variables. Well-defined HR practices of organizations creates a productive environment for employees. HR practices under HPWS are aligned to organizational goals, which can understand the immediate need of employees and respond to the crisis before it spreads negativity. Eisenberger and Stinglhamber (2011) supported the fact that availability of resources and proper infrastructure would facilitate work at the organization. Similarly, employees with job security and without any fear of losing job work more effectively and remain stress-free (Shih et al., 2006). Messersmith et al. (2011) found that the organization’s effort in training their employees and conducting fair appraisal has resulted in high AC. The career growth plans that HPWS promote reduce the feeling of bias among members (Jeong and Shin, 2019). Therefore, well-defined HR infrastructure as a component of HPWS encourages confidence among employees to raise constructive voice and enhance the positivity of mindfulness behaviour. An appropriate working environment and positive work behaviour would enable a positive work outcome, thus, supporting the role of HPWS as moderator.
The impact of mindfulness was studied on outcome variables which were mediated by employee voice behaviour and moderated by high-performance work systems. The practice of mindfulness is effective where different generations meet and solve issues unique to each generation (Lynch et al., 2011; de Bruin et al., 2015). Higher education is one such area where students and faculty (from same and different generations and from diverse backgrounds) meet to increase the value proposition (Schwind et al., 2017; Malouf et al., 2017). Therefore, the study has many practical implications.
The mediating relationship of employee voice behaviour indicates the need for shared view, collaboration, discussion and open forum for suggestion and idea-sharing in the domain of higher education (Knight, 2015; Darvas, 2018). Faculty members who constructively voice issues may create a stress free satisfied environment and management schools therefore, should promote such behaviour. The constructive voice behaviour will facilitate any change process that school is going through. This is because of constructive ideas, process change and presence of committed and satisfied employees. Higher education institutions in India shall be open for constructive communication and a healthy work culture so that the employee’s voice is heard not only for individual benefit but also for the larger good (Tuckey et al., 2018; Zivnuska et al., 2016).
Findings of the study reveal that the outcomes of mindfulness are not immediate or direct (O’Reilly, 1998). Its awareness prepares individuals to respond, raise and debate about the current state of affairs (Bush, 2011). It also prepares employees (faculty members) for uncertainties, imbalances and vulnerability the future economy presents in front of us. The study acknowledges that any school is a combination of individual personalities and systemic integration. The findings of this study acknowledged the role HR practices play in creating committed, stress-free, satisfied employees (Michel et al., 2014; Saavedra et al., 2010; Cheung, 2018). HPWS is one such set of HR practices that ensure fair treatment of employees, leading to regular development in vertical (Cheung, 2018) as well as horizontal growth where the breath of knowledge of employees increases by practicing job enrichment and delegation.
The study is not without limitations despite listing contributions. First, it uses only the higher education management faculty as a sample. The study would be more generalizable if another discipline of higher education like arts, science or engineering is included. However, management education and faculty members are closer to corporate requirements (Bennett et al., 2018) and hence, appropriate as the choice of sample. Second, the cross-sectional research design restricted the richness of information required for analysis. Mindfulness as a variable may take some practice and matures over time (Langer, 1998). Future researchers can experiment with longitudinal data to arrive at sound inferences based on the results. Thirdly, the data were collected using email, which restricted it to two different time intervals, resulting in possible common method variance. Though statistical measures were taken to control CMV, future researchers may improve procedural requirements by personally administering the questionnaire and by increasing the time gap between two intervals, while collecting data. Finally, the study was about faculty members teaching in varouus management schools of India. A similar study involving cross-cultural samples from developed nations or nations ranked top 10 in the happiness index (Li, 2018) may yield valuable insights. Future researchers can test different outcome variables keeping EVB as a mediator and HPWS as a moderator in different work settings.
