Earliest evidence of marine habitat use by mammals
Evidence for the earliest invasion of the marine realm by mammals was previously restricted to Eocene (48.6–37.8 Ma) skeletal remains. We report incontrovertible ichnofossil evidence for brackish-water habitat use by at least two mammalian species in southern Wyoming during the late Paleocene (58 Ma). These are the first Paleocene mammal trackways recorded in the United States and only the fourth documented in the world. Multiple tracks preserved in restricted marine deposits represent animals repeatedly walking across submerged to partially emergent tidal flats. Hundreds of tracks are preserved in planform and cross-sectional exposure within five horizons along a 1032 m tracksite. Four prints exhibit five clear toe imprints, while two others distinctly display four toes. Some tracks penetrate beds populated by dwelling traces of marine bivalves and polychaetes in the upper layers and sea anemones at the base. Candidates for the five-toed tracemakers are pantodonts such as Titanoides, Barylambda, and Coryphodon, which have been recovered from late Paleocene strata throughout western North America. The four-toed tracks provide the earliest evidence of previously-undescribed large artiodactyls and/or tapiroids, mutually supporting recent molecular phylogenetic studies that place the origin of Cetartiodactyla near the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (~ 67.7 Ma). Collectively, these trackways irrefutably demonstrate the utility of ichnological data in reconstructing the evolutionary history and adaptive behaviors of extinct taxa beyond the evidence provided by body fossils alone.
Despite intense interest in and field studies of early Cenozoic mammalian radiation and dispersal patterns, Paleocene mammal trackways are exceedingly rare with only three previously reported worldwide. The early Paleocene Sarjeantipes1 from Alberta, Canada is a medium-sized, five-toed ichnotaxon that superficially resembles prints made by modern raccoons (Procyon lotor). A heavily-eroded 11.2 m long trackway, also from Alberta, Canada, was laid down by large mammals in the late Paleocene. Although the prints are reported to be wide-gauge2, they might represent a parallel pair of narrow-gauge tracks. A narrow-gauged trackway from the late Paleocene of Spitsbergen, Norway is the ichnotype of Thulitheripus svalbardii and has been attributed to large pantodonts traversing a continental coastal mire3.
Here we report a newly discovered, aerially-extensive series of late Tiffanian (58 Ma) mammalian trackways, dispersed across multiple stratigraphic intervals and traceable for 1032 m along a belt of well-exposed siltstone and very fine-grained sandstone outcrops. Uniquely preserved in brackish-water delta complexes within a restricted marine embayment or lagoon, these trackways attest to the recurrent use of marine habitats by medium- to large-bodied mammals during the late Paleocene. A minimum of two mammalian taxa are identifiable: one associated with relatively large, narrow-gauge, five-toed tracks, and the other with medium-sized, four-toed tracks. This direct evidence of marine habitat utilization by early Paleocene mammals predates the earliest mammalian skeletal remains preserved in marine sediments4 by 9.4–20 million years and highlights the potential for ichnological data to identify previously unknown taxa and their ecological adaptations.
The late Paleocene age of the Hanna Formation trackways limits the known mammalian taxa sizeable enough to produce the five-digited prints to the Pantodonta3,18. One or more species, such as Titanoides primaevus, Barylambda faberi, or Coryphodon proterus, were likely responsible for the tracks deposited in this Paleocene lagoon (Fig. 8). Titanoides was identified as the originator of Late Paleocene Thulitheripus svalbardii from Norway3. The five clear digit impressions of T. svalbardii, with those on the manus appearing to be claw-like and strongly curved, bear some resemblance to the deeper print from the possible direct register track described above (Fig. 5f). However, we cannot definitively attribute any of the tracks to Thulitheripus nor to its associated Titanoides maker since the apparently narrow-clawed manus imprint from the Hanna Formation may be an artifact of substrate collapse in the deeper portion of the track.
Reconstructed track maker candidates for size comparison. (A) Paleocene Coryphodon proterus (Yale Peabody Museum specimen VPOU.016130, with a 62 cm long skull), based on measurements of Eocene C. radians18; (B) Titanoides primaevus based on skeletal reconstruction19 and scaled to holotype specimen (Yale Peabody Museum VPPU.016490); (C) Barylambda faberi based on mounted specimen displayed at the Field Museum of Natural History. Drawings made by A F-J W in Adobe Illustrator 2021 (version 25.2.1, https://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator.html).
The brackish-water setting of the trackways and their recurrence of deposition suggests that their five-toed mammalian originators routinely exploited aquatic habitats. The morphology and stable isotope chemistry of Coryphodon indicate that this pantodont exhibited semiaquatic habits analogous to those of extant common hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius)21. At an estimated weight of 700 kg, the only known Paleocene species of Coryphodon, C. proterus, was larger than later species and has only been documented from western North America22. The combination of mass and hypothesized natural history of these pantodonts renders them the most plausible candidates for our track makers. Since the Hanna Formation trackways are approximately 1.0–1.5 m.y. older than the earliest skeletal record of Coryphodon, confirmed attribution of these tracks to this genus would extend its origin farther into the Paleocene than indicated by the body fossil record alone.
The four-toed prints do not correspond to the skeletal elements of any mammals described from the late Paleocene but bear remarkable resemblance to tracks made by medium- to large-bodied artiodactyls and forefoot imprints of modern tapirs (Perissodactyla). Trace fossil evidence for the origination of animal taxa prior to their sampling in the body fossil record has been well documented for various invertebrate lineages, though not without controversy23,24,25. The earliest osteological record of tapiroids is from early Eocene strata of Ellesmere Island, Canada, fueling the hypothesis that the lineage had an earlier origin within North America26. Although the phylogeny of Paleocene mammals remains poorly constrained27, recent time-calibrated molecular investigations have proposed a late Cretaceous or early Paleocene (74.4–64.1 Ma, mean 67.7 Ma) origin for Cetartiodactyla and its sister taxon the Perisodactyla28. Consequently, attribution of the Hanna Formation four-toed tracks to either tapiroid or artiodactyl tracemakers is consistent with molecular phylogenetic studies and substantiates these hypotheses with tangible, physical evidence. Therefore, we contend that these four-toed Paleocene prints are attributable to as-of-yet undiscovered North American tapiroids or large-bodied artiodactyls.
Paleoecological Implications.
The restricted marine setting of the Hanna Formation tracks has intriguing paleoenvironmental and behavioral implications. The trackways demonstrate shallow, tidally influenced, brackish-water habitat use by at least two mammalian taxa during the late Paleocene (58 Ma), an interaction with marine environments previously unknown prior to the Eocene (48.6–37.8 Ma) on the basis of body fossils. Although the presence of sea anemone traces is typically associated with offshore or nearshore marine settings29, anemones can tolerate a wide range of physicochemical extremes, including subaerial exposure during low tide30. Therefore, the sea anemone traces abundantly preserved in beds bearing mammalian prints are consistent with shallow subtidal to intertidal settings (Fig. 3h).
The use of brackish-water habitats by modern large-bodied, terrestrial to semiaquatic mammals is relatively common. Mammals weighing ≥ 28 kg exploit estuarine and marine habitats temporarily to permanently, exhibiting a variety of non-exclusive behavioral strategies. Saltwater environments serve as dispersal routes between offshore islands or between mainland and island habitats for Asian elephants (Elephas maximus), Baird’s tapirs (Tapirus bairdii), caribou (Rangifer tarandus), chamois (Rupicapra spp.), Sumatran serow (Capricornis sumatraensis), and various species of deer31,32,33,34,35,36,37. The use of brackish-water environments may also reflect seasonally-expressed migratory responses to climatic stimuli, as demonstrated by the movement of polar bears (Ursus maritimus) with sea ice patterns and the rainy season dispersal of riverine hippopotamus to coastal regions38,39. Regular and year-round residence in estuarine and marine locales are generally associated with unique foraging opportunities provided in the form of saltwater-tolerant vegetation, invertebrates, vertebrates, and scavenge-able carcasses transported downstream by flooding events or landward by tidal action40,41. Aquatic habitats are also important for mammals seeking refuge from biting insects and/or potential predators35,42.
In subtropical to tropical regions, similar to the climatic and environmental conditions in which the Paleocene tracks were deposited, extant megafauna use brackish water environments for thermoregulation35,42,43. Hippopotamus submerge in South Africa’s St. Lucia Estuary to minimize sun exposure, regulate body temperatures, and reduce energy expenditure43. Estuarine areas shallow enough to stand in, but deep enough to remain partially to fully submerged (i.e., water depths of 1.0–1.49 m for animals with a shoulder height of 1.5 m), are preferred. Locations adjacent to river mouths support greater hippopotamus densities due to the opportunity for more efficient thermoregulation provided by bathymetric changes associated with sandy mouth bars43. Notably, the trackways we describe occur in sediments analogous to these microenvironments favored by thermoregulating hippopotamus. Specifically, the greatest density of tracks is situated proximal to the Paleocene distributary mouth (Fig. 1). Abundance of tracks decreases 412 m to the southeast of the channel, where exposure becomes limited, and disappears completely 300 m to the northwest of the channel despite good exposure.
Modern mammals are also drawn to brackish and marine environments to satisfy physiological requirements related to sodium deficiencies35,42. Forest elephants (Loxodonta cyclotis) in Gabon are attracted to salt-laden coastal vegetation, while Asian elephants in Malaysian rainforests frequent the coast to drink saline and hypersaline water42,44. Similar to their modern large, terrestrial mammal analogs, the Paleocene trackmakers were likely prone to mineral deficiencies due to excessive mineral-leaching from the adjacent tropical forest soil and the resulting decreased availability of sodium in the tropical and subtropical vegetation, driving them to take advantage of coastal mineral resources.
Ichnological, stratigraphic, and sedimentological reconnaissance was undertaken for late Paleocene strata within the Hanna Formation, north of Medicine Bow Wyoming, USA from 2016–2020. Previously unidentified brackish-water strata and tracksites were subsequently identified, examined, measured, and photographed in the field. All-purpose baking flour was used to highlight the prints for photographic purposes, such that marking would not inflict any significant adverse impact on the natural environment. Sedimentary sections were logged through the stratigraphic interval comprising the deltaic complex in which the trackways are preserved. Grain size, sedimentary structures, bedding contact, lateral continuity, and associated trace fossils were recorded in detail. Individual beds were walked out to establish correlations and relationships to surrounding horizons. A variety of modern and historic footprints and tracksites were examined to critically evaluate the morphology, taxonomic affinity, and locomotory behavior of the trace-making taxa. Avian, reptilian, amphibian, and invertebrate animals were excluded as potential print-making candidates based on the morphology of the prints and the gait pattern preserved in many of the tracks. Black and brown bear (Ursus arctos and U. americanus, respectively) footprints were photographed and cast in dental plaster in Alaska and Colorado, USA, and Alberta, Canada for comparison with the Paleocene tracks.
