Human performance in three-hands tasks
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-88862-9
The successful completion of complex tasks like hanging a picture or laparoscopic surgery requires coordinated motion of more than two limbs. User-controlled supernumerary robotic limbs (SL) have been proposed to bypass the need for coordination with a partner in such tasks. However, neither the capability to control multiple limbs alone relative to collaborative control with partners, nor how that capability varies across different tasks, is well understood. In this work, we present an investigation of tasks requiring three-hands where the foot was used as an additional source of motor commands. We considered: (1) how does simultaneous control of three hands compare to a cooperating dyad; (2) how this relative performance was altered by the existence of constraints emanating from real or virtual physical connections (mechanical constraints) or from cognitive limits (cognitive constraints). It was found that a cooperating dyad outperformed a single user in all scenarios in terms of task score, path efficiency and motion smoothness. However, while the participants were able to reach more targets with increasing mechanical constraints/decreasing number of simultaneous goals, the relative difference in performance between a dyad and a participant performing trimanual activities decreased, suggesting further potential for SLs in this class of scenario.
More than two limbs are often required to successfully carry out complex tasks such as hanging a picture, industrial assembly or laparoscopic surgery. These activities are typically completed through coordination with other individuals, however a companion is not always available and miscommunications and a lack of familiarity between collaborators may compromise the task’s success and result in inefficient performance1.

Supernumerary robotic limbs (SL), which are (e.g. wearable) user-controlled robotic limbs, represent one potential means of allowing a single person to execute complex actions by augmenting their natural motor capabilities2,3. Many supernumerary devices, including supernumerary fingers4,5, arms6,7 and legs8 have been built across industrial and medical applications. Significant research has focused on the development and control strategies for these devices9,10,11. However, less research has been placed on two central questions for their application: Are humans able to reliably make use of three limbs in task augmentation scenarios? and Which tasks are best suited to augmented activities?
Previous studies which have evaluated the ability for a single human subject to coordinate three hands together (trimanual activities) include12, who studied re-sizing13,14, who demonstrated the ability to control three hands with the natural limb and15 who investigated the impact of adding a third hand to different bi-manual tasks of varying coupling level. From these studies it has been observed that human subjects can control three hands simultaneously. When the hands are uncoupled and free of any mechanical constraint, the addition of a third hand into the task has little negative impact on the subject’s performance when compared to their performance in similar bi-manual operations. In contrast when mechanical constraints were present between the hands, the addition of a third handed task was found to significantly degrade the subject’s performance in the original mechanically constrained bimanual task. While these studies have performed preliminary analysis into the trimanual skills of human subjects, they have to date been limited to applications in which the task could be performed with two hands. More importantly, they have not compared the subject’s performance to that which would be possible with traditional human-human coordination.
In this work, we investigated the questions of: (1) how do subjects perform in different trimanual tasks with different levels of virtual mechanical coupling and simultaneous targets to track? and (2) how does the subject’s performance compare to a dyad executing the same task? Using the subject’s dominant foot as an input for controlling a virtual third hand, thirty participants performed trimanual tasks in three scenarios: (1) uncoupled case, where each limb aims at a different goal and moves independently from the other limbs; (2) 2-coupled case, where two limbs have the same goal and are virtually mechanically coupled together while the third limb’s motion and goal are independent; (3) 3-coupled case, where all limbs have the same common goal and are virtually mechanically coupled. The subject’s preference and performance carrying out the task on their own and with a randomly assigned partner were evaluated using their task score and other motion characteristics. To our knowledge, this study is the first to compare solo and dyadic performance in trimanual activities. The study also builds on the exploration of mechanical and cognitive constraints from15 by considering additional scenarios. Virtual springs connecting the virtual hands were used to render the virtual mechanical coupling, avoiding cursors to be passively driven by a rigid connection.
Figure 3 shows the subject performance for each of the three tasks in terms of their score and (where applicable) spring length variation and smoothness. It can be seen that dyads perform better than solo subjects in term of score (\({p}<0.001\)) and that their performance is significantly better in the 3-Coupled task when compared to both the uncoupled task (\({p}<0.001\)) and 2-Coupled task (\({p}=0.03\)) (Fig. 3a). These results are confirmed looking at the number of completed sub-trials, not considering the fails: in all tasks the solo subjects completed less sub-trials than dyads (\({p}<0.001\)) and the 3-Coupled task shows significantly more sub-trials completed than the 2-Coupled task, which in turn has more completed sub-trials than the uncoupled task (all p values lower than 1/1000). This suggests that in general people controlling three limbs track the targets more efficiently in the 3-Coupled task than in the others.
Conversely, the subjects seemed to struggle with the virtual mechanical constraints, as emerges from the length variation of the elastic band (Fig.  3b), that is higher in the 3-Coupled task than in the 2-Coupled task. In coupled trials, the subject controlling the hands tended to make them close to each, compressing the elastic band (negative values); on the contrary, in the 3-Coupled task the band is almost always overstretched in both the solo and dyad conditions (positive values). Considering the absolute variation rate, there is no difference between solo and dyad conditions nor between the tasks. The comparison between the first and last trials, in term of score and normalized sub-trial time, revealed a learning effect in all the tasks (\({p}<0.01\)).
Performance: (a) Score for Uncoupled, 2-Coupled and 3-Coupled task. Each dot represents the value of the last trial. Blue dots correspond to solo sessions; orange dots correspond to paired sessions; squares represent median values. (b) Spring length variations (\(\Delta L/L_0\)) in 2-Coupled and 3-Coupled tasks. (c) Delta score between Dyad and Solo. (d) Limb’s Smoothness (spectral arc length) for Uncoupled, 2-Coupled and 3-Coupled task (DF: Dominant Foot, DH: Dominant Hand and NDH: Non-Domimant Hand). Each dot represents the average value of the last trial, while bars represent the standard error. The ‘*’ symbol is used to mark the statistically significant results, with * for \({p}\leqslant 0.05\), ** for \({p}\leqslant 0.01\) and *** for \({p}\leqslant 0.001\). All reported p-values correspond to a significance level of 0.05.
Questionnaire results: (a,c) preference and difficulty rank among the tasks for the solo and paired (hands-foot) sessions; (b,d) Preference and difficulty rank among the sessions for the three tasks.
The smoothness across different sessions can be seen from Fig. 3d. The solo sessions are less smooth than the dyad ones (\({p}<0.001\)) and they are significantly smoother in the 2-Coupled and 3-Coupled tasks than in the uncoupled task. Across all trials the foot exhibits significantly lower smoothness (\({p}<0.001\)), however, no significant difference was observed in the virtual motion resulting from the two hands.
Similar results were also observed in the distance travelled by each virtual cursor. In particular, dyads again perform better than solo subjects: the distance travelled by the cursors on the screen (divided by the number of total sub-trials) is in all cases lower for the paired sessions than for the solo one (\({p}<0.001\)). Additionally, the distance travelled by the foot controlled cursor is significantly different (higher) than that of the hands (\({p}<0.001\)). However, in this case the dominant hand covers significantly less distance than the other limbs (\({p}<0.001\)).
The questionnaire reveals that most of the subjects prefer the 2-Coupled and 3-Coupled task rather than the Uncoupled task (\({p}<0.01\)) even though they find them more difficult than the Uncoupled task (\({p}=0.015\), \({p}=0.029\)). In general, the uncoupled task is the least preferred in any case—solo, hands and foot session (Fig. 4). Subjects also preferred to work in dyads rather than alone -preference for the solo session is significantly lower than preference for the hands session (\({p}=0.011\)) and for the foot session (\({p}=0.033\))- perceiving the solo session significantly more difficult than the paired ones (\({p}\ll 0.001\)). There is no clear preference for the foot control rather than the hands (Fig. 4).
Throughout the experiment, participants performed better in dyads than in solo, in terms of their score, travelled distance and smoothness, indicating that they possessed more control in trimanual activities for the different tasks. In general, this suggests that the benefits of having the task performed by two agents, such as parallelised planning, outperformed any of the negative effects coming from the need for communication between the two partners. However, it should be noted that in most tasks, where hands and foot controlled virtual limbs were not coupled, the dyads could complete the task independently of their partner. Since the participants possess everyday experience in bimanual/unimanual actions, they may be starting at a higher skill level than the solo scenario. Therefore further study of the learning effects is required.
Another aspect to be eventually investigated is the coupling between one hand only and the foot, with the other hand uncoupled. That case was not considered here for two main reasons: (1) to limit the number of different tasks (thereby ensuring the sessions were within a 90 minutes period); (2) because the current choice seemed to be most realistic case for applications (where the user completes a task using their hands while they can do an additional task with an extra limb).
Compared to the hands, the higher distance travelled by the foot and its lower smoothness are coherent to its use requiring lower fine motor control during everyday tasks. While the use of non-equal scaling factors allowed for equivalent workspace sizes for the different limbs, it is also possible that the scaling factor acted to further enlarge this difference. This suggests a limit for foot control as a tool for trimanual tasks, requiring either significant training in the use of the foot to normalise the virtual hand dexterity, software adjustment, the use of an entirely different input device for the third hand or the integration of human-robot collaboration strategies to optimise the foot control’s performance18,19.
The participants’ score increased in the 3-coupled task when compared to the other tasks. This may be a result of required lower cognitive load, where this task requires subjects to only focus on one goal at a time. Also, since the foot exhibits lower dexterity, this coupling with the hands could have contributed to improve the participants’ performance in the 3-coupled task. However, it should be noted that the coupled tasks possess the additional factor of the virtual spring constraint. While the absolute spring variation did not show a significant difference depending on the addition of more springs (as between the 2-coupled and 3-coupled tasks), its addition represents a critical factor of successful task performance that cannot be directly considered within the score.
While the dyad performance across the different tasks is observed to always be better than that of the solo subject, the difference in performance between the solo and dyad sessions was found to be smaller for the 3-Coupled task (Fig. 3c) when compared to the two-Coupled task (\(p=0.024\)). This result suggests that the 3-coupled case may be most suitable trimanual task for a single operator since it requires continuous coordinated motion across the limbs. This effect may derive from the virtual mechanical constraints that could have helped the foot control, improving the solo performance more than the dyad one -not requiring coordination between two agents- and thus reducing the difference between the solo and dyad performance. However if this result is present for any such constraints requiring coordination across the limbs represents an open question for further study.
Subjective perception in general is consistent with the quantitative analysis, although this perception may be biased by the reward of the score. Participants preferred the 3-coupled task and working in dyads. Both of these preferences were aligned with having a better score. Those results could be explained by the subjective preference for tasks that require lower cognitive load or by their preference for having higher reward from the score.
