Poverty and mental health: the work of the female sanitary inspectors in Bradford (c. 1901–1912)
Although there are many excellent studies of the work of pioneer women public health officers, few accounts dwell on mental health issues or discuss any relationship that such staff might have understood to exist between poverty and mental health in the early twentieth century. This is a remarkable omission considering that social and feminist historians have highlighted the problems created by the way early practitioners sought to manage poverty and arguably the poor. Drawing on records created by Female Sanitary Inspectors (FSIs) in Bradford, this study chronicles distressing economic and social conditions but also reveals encounters between the staff and people experiencing mental health problems and mental health crises. The ways in which the FSIs chose to both make and deny links between the abject poverty witnessed in the slum districts and cases of mental disorder forms an important strand to the analysis that follows. Interestingly, it is the well-being of the staff that emerges as a persistent and even over-riding concern.
The history of public health in the UK tends to be divided into two distinct phases, with John Welshman (2000, pp. 26–27), amongst others, highlighting the contrast between nineteenth-century sanitary reform and the development of personal and preventative health services in the twentieth century. He emphasises the way Victorian sanitary reform continues to be presented as a ‘heroic struggle’, whilst accounts of later public health schemes tend to pessimistically focus on the decline of public health as a ‘medical specialism’ and ‘local government responsibility’. Over the last two decades a revival of interest in municipal medical projects (Welshman, 2000; Harris, 2004, pp. 219–242; Levene and colleagues 2011) has started to correct this picture, at least for the interwar period. Yet, the idea that nothing very interesting was happening in the public health sphere has been continuously challenged by studies concerned with the early-twentieth-century proliferation and evolution of services ‘for mothers and infants, provision for schoolchildren, and individual diseases such as tuberculosis’ (Welshman, 2000, pp. 26–27).
The distinctive contribution of women officers to these services has been widely recognised (Dingwall et al., 1988, p. 187; Davies, 1988). From the 1890s, there was gradual but significant expansion in the number of women employed in public health work across the UK, although there were different routes into the sector and job titles and duties showed considerable variation. According to Jennifer Haynes, ‘the overlapping roles of woman sanitary inspector, health visitor and tuberculosis visitor were performed alongside each other in local public health departments, often by the same women’ (Haynes, 2006, p. 15). The historiography has also been particularly concerned with the emergence of the woman sanitary inspector (Brimblecombe, 2000) and her reinvention as a health visitor (Dingwall et al., 1988, pp. 173–203) whose identity became increasingly bound up with that of the nurse. Anne Kelly and Anthea Symonds (2003) certainly develop important insights from considering the long-term evolution of health visiting as a branch of community nursing. However, most controversy and debate still centres on the origins of the profession and the ‘process by which health visiting was captured as a branch of nursing’ (Dingwall et al., 1988, p. 188).
Many excellent studies have showcased the work of pioneer women sanitary inspectors (Brimblecombe, 2000; Haynes, 2006), and the later profession of health visiting (Clark, 1973; Owen, 1977; Davies, 1988; Welshman, 1997; Malone, 2000). Unfortunately, few accounts dwell on mental health issues or discuss any relationship that staff might have understood to exist between poverty and mental health in the early twentieth century. This is an important omission since poverty has been a major theme in the historiography. Social and feminist historians have highlighted the problematic relationship early practitioners had to the management of poverty (Davin, 1978; Dyhouse, 1979; Ross, 1993, pp. 204–209; Kelly and Symonds, 2003, pp. 16–20). They suggest that this exacerbated tensions between practitioners’ care and control functions. These served to restrict both professional development and the effectiveness of services offered (Lewis, 1986, pp. 109–115).
Using records created by, and for, the Female Sanitary Inspectors (FSIs) in Bradford c. 1900–1912, this case study finds no shortage of reports describing distressing economic and social conditions. It also uncovers some personal notes about unplanned encounters between the professional women and people experiencing mental health problems and mental health crises. The study explores how the FSIs chose to both make and deny links between the abject poverty witnessed in the slum districts and cases of mental illness. Interestingly, the well-being of the staff emerges as a persistent and even over-riding concern as sanitary inspection was combined with, and then increasingly displaced by, health visiting duties.
Health visitors today routinely seek to promote mental health, as well as support those with mental health problems. Such is the range of current activities that some leading practitioners are explicitly reminding staff, and employers, that their primary focus should remain on supporting young families (Adams, 2012). The specific health visitor concern with new babies, small children, and their main carers harkens back to the earliest days of the infant welfare movement and sits comfortably within both critical and celebratory histories of the profession (Dwork, 1987, pp. 226–230). The evolution of mental health work is arguably less well understood. Modern practitioners tend to date the major expansion, if not origins, of these duties to the late 1960s and early 1970s. Textbooks from this era include introductions to ‘psychiatric aspects of the family’, as well as ‘special aspects of psychiatry’ (Howells, 1967). This timeline draws attention to the impact of the Jameson Report (1956); the gradual switch to GP attachment; the reorganisation of local authority services and the NHS (1972–1974); the creation of the Council for the Training of Health Visitors (1962); and the development of new principles of health visiting by the renamed Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors, 1977–1982 (CETHV, 1982) that underpinned revised training schemes (Dingwall, 1977, pp. 187–188).
Yet, health visitor engagement with mental health and mental illness had much longer antecedents that merit exploration. Until 1974, women public health officers (including health visitors and women employed as sanitary inspectors but performing health visiting duties) served under the direction of individual local Medical Officers of Health (MOsH) and their work was strongly influenced by his changing priorities over many decades. MOsH tended to take a holistic view of health and routinely discussed the causes and consequences of ill-health as part of their statutory public health duties and responsibilities for overseeing municipal health services (Newsholme, 1936). The creation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948 and the loss of municipal general hospitals encouraged MOsH to develop a new focus on promoting mental health; preventing mental illnesses; and offering diagnostic, treatment, and support services for patients and their families. John Welshman describes some innovative local schemes but notes that their potential was restricted by a lack of support from central government (Welshman, 2000, pp. 222–230). Nevertheless, health visitors performed a variety of roles within such programmes. These were particularly strong in parts of Scotland where, for example, multi-disciplinary psycho-geriatric services were developed in the 1950s and 1960s (Nottingham and Dougall, 2007). Some former MOsH regarded the period 1948–1974 as the true ‘golden age’ of public health services (Francis, 1987, p. 141), but older colleagues reminded them that they, and their staff, enjoyed even greater powers and responsibilities in the years 1929–48 when the relationship between poverty and health came under ever greater scrutiny (Kelly and Symonds, 2003, pp. 34–35).
The 1929 Local Government Act gave local authorities new responsibilities for mental health services. The Ministry of Health encouraged detailed planning and supported ambitious MOsH who wanted to develop innovative schemes in response to the 1930 Mental Treatment Act (MTA). There are some examples of health visitors supporting these activities by liaising with and between different clinics; providing background details about patients and families; visiting discharged patients; and working with families receiving ongoing support because of long-term sickness or disability. While health visitor involvement with individual patients experiencing acute mental illness was extremely limited in the first half of the twentieth century, the interwar period saw the profession accepting increasing responsibilities for the long-term support of mentally frail older people and certain other patient groups. More important, however, was the health propaganda work health visitors were tasked with. Health visitors offered individual and group health education, which extended to the promotion of mental well-being, and also sign-posted people towards services designed to offer the benefits of early treatment following the 1930 MTA. Interwar health visitors were often well-versed in the principles of the mental hygiene movement (Thomson, 2006, pp. 48–49, p. 170, pp. 175–176, pp. 191–194, p. 239), and in some areas staffed key parts of the services established to implement the 1913 Mental Deficiency Act (Thomson, 1998).
MOsH had always encouraged their staff to take a holistic view of health and this was supported by the development of ever more comprehensive and inclusive health services at a local and national level (Levene and colleagues, 2011), as well as the academic study of social medicine (Mckeown and Lowe, 1974). Yet, even before 1929, health visitors had planned and unplanned involvement with mental health issues as an inevitable consequence of their work supporting infant welfare programmes, school medical inspections and clinics, tuberculosis schemes, and venereal disease services. The routine nature of these activities means that they typically received little attention in contemporary reports of interwar health visiting written by MOsH beyond praise for the tact trained health visitors could be relied upon to use to diffuse difficult situations or cope with distressing cases. Such records provided no space for health visitors to recount their personal experiences, although MOsH sometimes explained high levels of staff sickness with reference to the pressure a particular team had been under. This silence can usefully be contrasted with the way an earlier generation of female officers used their independently authored reports to describe their experiences of working with a wide range of client groups and explicitly theorise about the causes and consequences of mental illness. Poverty is a consistent theme, and major concern, running through the Edwardian Bradford FSI reports.
At the start of the twentieth century public health provision in the UK was moving away from its origins in nineteenth-century sanitary reform, towards new models of personal and preventative health services. These reforms required new staff and innovative ways of engaging with targeted client groups. It was the woman-to-woman conversation at the heart of so many of these initiatives that excited contemporary commentators such as Dr Bostock Hill (Dingwall et al., 1988, p. 187) and attracted the attention of later generations of social historians and feminist scholars. Their sophisticated critiques of the aims, methods and achievements of pioneer visiting schemes (conducted by health visitors and/or other female staff) have usefully highlighted class and gender relations as both organising points and significant sources of tension. Poverty and its management emerge as key themes from the historiography, but such analysis can crowd out other issues. The literature is, for example, almost totally silent on the relationship that contemporary actors drew between poverty and mental health.
The records created by the Bradford FSIs provide powerful descriptions of the acute and enduring poverty experienced by slum dwellers. They also explore the damage staff believed such poverty was inflicting on individuals, families, and communities. Initially, FSI discussions centred on immediate threats to physical health, but over time mental health and well-being emerged as distinct concerns. Such interests and activities were closely bound up with professional projects. This was a moment when women sanitary inspectors were fighting a defensive (and ultimately losing) battle over their reinvention as health visitors. Mental health and mental deficiency were fashionable topics and staff (and their professional leaders) hoped to bolster their professional credentials by demonstrating relevant, even unique, expertise. If women officers could escape a narrow concern with women and infants, they would be better placed to maintain parity with male sanitary inspectors and preserve their valued tradition of independent reporting. The Bradford FSI reports served to advance these agendas. They also anchored the work of the FSIs in the wider public health movement. Perhaps most significantly, they allowed the staff to communicate with groups engaged in ongoing political battles over the future of municipal services in the city. The distinctive contribution of the Fabian Society to reforms in Bradford and the national development of professions such as sanitary inspection (Haynes, 2006, p. 59) should not be underestimated.
The case study encourages a broader re-evaluation of histories of mental health care in so far as they discuss relationships to poverty and relationships between service-providers and service-users. Pre-1914 asylum studies foreground poverty as a cause and consequence of mental illness in ways that histories of mental health care throughout the rest of the twentieth century, far more concerned with tracking changing diagnostic labels and therapeutic innovations, do not always manage to replicate. In part, this is because of the proliferation (and fragmentation) of professional, and increasingly lay, voices that claimed relevant knowledge and expertise. The Bradford FSIs serve as an early example of how new professional groups inserted themselves into the field of mental health. Remarkably, the work of the Bradford FSIs was based solely in the community. Many historians highlight the hostility of clients to visits. Yet, there is ample evidence that, when confronted with mental health crises, slum dwellers actively sought the assistance of FSIs. In, fact in these scenarios, it was most often the officer rather than the client who was reluctant to proceed. Several questions are thus provoked: why did the slum dwellers seek this assistance, and what did they hope or expect would result from it? Perhaps, either imperfect knowledge of, or frustration with, existing models of service delivery and/or arrangements for accessing provision explain much. Such concerns, hitherto unexplored in the literature, merit further consideration as they illuminate debates about mental illness and mental health care being conducted in locales and between actors not usually considered. It is significant that poverty was such an overarching but also contentious theme.
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
