Deep learning to predict elevated pulmonary artery pressure in patients with suspected pulmonary hypertension using standard chest X ray
Accurate diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (PH) is crucial to ensure that patients receive timely treatment. We hypothesized that application of artificial intelligence (AI) to the chest X-ray (CXR) could identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) and stratify the risk of heart failure hospitalization with PH. We retrospectively enrolled a total of 900 consecutive patients with suspected PH. We trained a convolutional neural network to identify patients with elevated PAP (> 20 mmHg) as the actual value of PAP. The endpoints in this study were admission or occurrence of heart failure with elevated PAP. In an independent evaluation set for detection of elevated PAP, the area under curve (AUC) by the AI algorithm was significantly higher than the AUC by measurements of CXR images and human observers (0.71 vs. 0.60 and vs. 0.63, all p < 0.05). In patients with AI predicted PH had 2-times the risk of heart failure with PH compared with those without AI predicted PH. This preliminary work suggests that applying AI to the CXR in high risk groups has limited performance when used alone in identifying elevated PAP. We believe that this report can serve as an impetus for a future large study.
Accurate diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (PH) is crucial to ensure that patients receive timely treatment for a progressive clinical course1. Although approaches for accurate diagnosis of PH may avoid development to symptomatic heart failure, a low-cost and noninvasive screening tool does not exist in the clinical setting. As a result, several groups have sought to identify minimally invasive or noninvasive approaches to identifying patients with PH. The American College of Chest Physicians has recommended obtaining a chest X-ray (CXR) in patients who are suspected of having PH, to reveal features supportive of a diagnosis of PH2. However, it is well known that the sensitivity and specificity are low. Currently, the recommended test for screening is echocardiography; however, the test requires intensive training and highly qualified technical staff and is relatively expensive3. Although the multi-modality assessment plays a central role for the assessment of PH4, the accessibility of diagnostic modalities is sometimes limited in the many remote areas and facilities. With this in mind, we may need a widely usable strategy for identifying a high-risk cohort requiring appropriate right heart catheter (RHC) procedures.
Artificial intelligence (AI), using neural networks, has been applied to sophisticated recognition of subtle patterns in digital data in medical fields5,6. A family of algorithms has led to state-of-the art improvement in word recognition, visual object recognition, object detection, etc7,8. Recently, simple digital data (e.g., electrocardiogram) can identify asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction at baseline and during follow-up using AI9. Thus, we hypothesized that application of AI to the CXR could identify a high-risk cohort of PH and stratify the risk of heart failure hospitalization with PH. To test this hypothesis, we created, trained, validated, and then tested a neural network.
The subject characteristics included in this study are shown in Table 1. The training cohort consisted of 900 patients with suspected PH. Blood pressure and heart rate at baseline were well-controlled in this cohort (heart rate: 74 ± 16 bpm and systolic blood pressure: 122 ± 22 mmHg). Subjects were divided into two groups with PH (PH group: 439 patients; mean age, 66 ± 14 years; 233 male) and without PH (non-PH group: 461 patients; mean age, 68 ± 12 years; 278 male). There were 215 patients with pre-capillary PH (mPAP > 20 mmHg and PAWP ≤ 15 mmHg) and 224 patients with post-capillary PH (mPAP > 20 mmHg and PAWP > 15 mmHg). The characteristics of the patients in the separate validation group is also summarized in the Table 1. There is no difference in the characteristics between the training cohort and the validation cohort.
We examined various image selections in our analysis. We prepared three datasets; Dataset 1: no exclusion criteria (n = 900). Dataset 2: excluded for low image quality from Dataset 1 (n = 833). Dataset 3: excluded for wire, pacemaker, and any artificial materials from Dataset 2 (n = 748). We compared the diagnostic ability of AI from learning in 3 different datasets. In the results, there were no significant differences among AI algorithms from 3 datasets on nested tenfold cross validation (Supplemental Fig. S6. Dataset 1: AUC: 0.69 ± 0.05; Dataset 2: AUC: 0.72 ± 0.07; and Dataset 3: AUC: 0.66 ± 0.05, all comparisons were p > 0.05). Thus, we determined Dataset 1 as a final analysis cohort.
Results of the ROC analysis used to assess the diagnostic ability for detecting the PH in the separate validation cohort are shown in Fig. 2. The measurements of CXR images with largest AUC was Hilum (Hilum: AUC = 0.60, PRHB: AUC = 0.58, Hilum/chest ratio: AUC = 0.60, Hilum + PRHB: AUC = 0.59). We compared the AUCs using human observers, measurements of CXR images, and artificial intelligence for detection of PH (normal mean PAP and high mean PAP). The highest diagnostic ability was AI (AUC: 0.71). For detection of PH, the AUC by the AI algorithm was significantly higher than the AUC by measurement of CXR images and human observers (0.71 vs. 0.60 and vs. 0.63, all comparisons were p < 0.05). Importantly, the negative predictive value (NPV) of AI algorithm for detecting PH was 95.0% using the cut off value of 0.42 for AI estimated probability (Supplemental Table S1). To check the generalizability of our results, we gathered an external validation group of 55 patients (Supplemental Table S2), the AUC by the DL algorithm was 0.70. The AUC in this group was similar to that of the original cohort.
Diagnostic ability for pulmonary hypertension: The area under the curve by AI algorithms for detection of pulmonary hypertension was significantly higher than the AUC by measurement of CXR images and human observers.
The subject characteristics of patients with AI predicted PH and without AI predicted PH are shown in Supplemental Table S3. In patients with predicted PH, 167 patients (37%) had the composite outcomes over a median follow-up period of 5.9 years (Fig. 3a, red line). Of these patients without predicted PH, 97 patients (22%) had the composite outcomes over a median follow-up period of 7.7 years (Fig. 3a, blue line). This represented a twofold risk of future events when the AI algorithm defines the CXR as abnormal (hazard ratio: 1.9, 95% confidence interval: 1.5–2.4, p < 0.001). Interestingly, there was no significant difference in Kaplan-Meir plots between two groups defined by human observers (Fig. 3b, p = 0.14) and measurement of CXR images (Fig. 3c, p = 0.08).
Incidence of composite outcomes in patients stratified by AI classification (a), human observers (b), and measurement of CXR images (c). The composite outcomes were admission or occurrence of HF with PH. Of these patients with AI predicted PH, 37% patients had the composite outcomes (red line) during follow-up. Of these patients without AI predicted PH, 22% patients had the composite outcomes (blue line) during follow-up.
To help understand the AI assessment, we have analyzed the images where AI was focused using Grad-CAM22. Grad-CAM revealed that our model focused on the specific areas of CXR. To clarify the areas, we superimposed heat map images in 10 true positive and true negative cases in Fig. 4. In the elevated PAP group, the focus by AI tended to be on the right upper lung area and the area around the heart. In the normal PAP group, the focus by AI tended to be on the both sides of hilar points. In general, the right upper pulmonary field is a common site of focal congestion (e.g. mitral regurgitation), enlargement of the heart can suggest increased pulmonary artery pressure, and both hilar areas are also important in cases with elevated pulmonary artery pressure. Thus, we believed the resulting AI model was able to appropriately discern differences in CXR images and the findings were consistent with our previous knowledge.
Examples of grad-CAM visualizations. In the elevated pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) group, the focus by AI tended to be on the right upper lung area and the area around the heart. In the normal PAP group, the focus by AI tended to be on the both sides of hilar points.
We demonstrated that DL algorithm is an objective method, and its discrimination was similar to that of assessment by experts and manual measurements. In addition, because of the high negative predictive value using a particular threshold, undergoing unnecessary RHC might be reduced using the AI algorithm. Importantly, we note that in patients with a network-predicted PH, there was 2-times increase in risk of future heart failure hospitalization with PH compared with patients without a network-predicted PH. On the other hand, there was no significant difference in Kaplan-Meir plots between two groups defined by human observers and measurement of CXR images. This result suggests that the AI algorithm can obtain a new insight using a standard economical method. To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate that the AI algorithm adds new information to CXR for the prediction of PH confirmed by invasive methods.
Previously, CXR is a simple and economical method that is available globally. Thus, this technique is considered a useful tool to check patients with suspected elevated PAP23. A recent study showed measurements of CXR can lead to identifying more subjects suffering from undiagnosed PH14. However, the AUC was limited as 0.60–0.62. Moreover, there were several methods including laboratory data, electrocardiogram, and physical examinations for detection of PH24,25,26,27. In previous studies, the number of invasive data was limited, and the accuracy was also limited as AUCs up to 0.65 for these methods. Our results of CXR measurements are consistent with those works. In the view point of reproducibility, automated assessment is needed to obtain quantitative results without any user interaction including measurements. Our results demonstrate that an AI model can be trained to estimate PH on CXR images. We believe this study is a pilot study leaning towards the possibility of applying a DL algorithm in the clinical assessment of pulmonary hypertension.
The specific CXR characteristics used by the convolutional neural network to classify individuals as having PH are not well known because of a “black box” algorithm. We suspect it is detecting the known pathological effects of PH on the CXR. According to the results of heat map analysis, AI assessment mainly focused on the heart and lung areas. The AI algorithm might be tracing the process of human knowledge. The use of AI may be extended beyond the capacity of human knowledge in the future.
Assessment of PH using the AI algorithm is an objective method, and its discrimination was similar to that of assessment by experts and manual measurements. CXR can be used as an inexpensive, standardized, universal test. If many patients can access an inexpensive, reasonable test for PH, individual patients could benefit from early effective therapies. For examples, connective tissue disease is a high-risk group of developing pre-capillary PH and one of the most suspected histories of PH1,13. This method may allow us to identify more patients with possible PH in regions lacking sufficient imaging facilities. In the clinical setting, it is not so difficult to detect post-capillary PH caused by left heart failure. On the other hand, early detection of pre-capillary PH is also important, because it is often misdiagnosed, and treatment of pre-capillary PH may differ from post-capillary PH. Future studies involving larger numbers are required to assess the AI models for the differentiation of pre- and post-capillary PH.
In this study, AI tool was tested in patients who have already had an echocardiographic study and CXR indicating suspected PH. Because it is impossible to use the RHC for the patients without suspected cardiovascular diseases due to the ethical issues. Thus, we were unable to claim any value of the AI assessment in screening patients for PH based on clinical signs alone. AI assessment may be considered an option to check the necessity of RHC in patients with suspected PH, with a negative predictive value of 95%. However, further validation is necessary to determine the feasibility of CXR utilized in a stand-alone manner.
First, the number of patients was modest. Although DL algorithms require thousands of patients, our “prognosis” data strongly support the new insight for this approach. Second, we did not make the model to predict specific types of PH (e.g. normal, pre-capillary PH, post-capillary PH), because the number of patients is too small to make a feasible AI model after classification. They should be evaluated further by echocardiography and cardiac catheterization in the referral centers. Third, this population did have an indication for RHC, it is a high-risk population. The AI algorithm should be tested in a more general screening setting for PH. Forth, the accuracy of AI algorithm was modest. Fifth, due to the limited diagnostic performance, we thought this approach may be more suited to detect elevated pulmonary artery pressure as the first-line test especially in a situation where echocardiography accessibility is limited. However, further clinical trials are needed to assess the clinical feasibility for this method in a real-world setting. Regarding these limitations, this study is a preliminary work and we believe that this report can serve as an impetus for a future large multi-center study.
