All-optical majority gate based on an injection-locked laser
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-51025-y
An all-optical computer has remained an elusive concept. To construct a practical computing primitive equivalent to an electronic Boolean logic, one should utilize nonlinearity that overcomes weaknesses that plague many optical processing schemes. An advantageous nonlinearity provides a complete set of logic operations and allows cascaded operations without changes in wavelength or in signal encoding format. Here we demonstrate an all-optical majority gate based on a vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL). Using emulated signal coupling, the arrangement provides Bit Error Ratio (BER) of 10−6 at the rate of 1 GHz without changes in the wavelength or in the signal encoding format. Cascaded operation of the injection-locked laser majority gate is simulated on a full adder and a 3-bit ripple-carry adder circuits. Finally, utilizing the spin-flip model semiconductor laser rate equations, we prove that injection-locked lasers may perform normalization operations in the steady-state with an arbitrary linear state of polarization.
During the past four decades, successful scaling of CMOS technology has enabled a multitude of computing devices, such as mobile phones and personal computers, which contain transistors numbering from hundreds of millions to billions. Recently, however, miniaturization of the field-effect transistors has become increasingly difficult because of the quantum mechanical effects, the challenges of doping, and the limits of thermal dissipation. Consequently, the computing community has been searching for alternative processing paradigms, such as spintronic majority-gate circuits1.
Optical computing has been studied as an alternative to silicon-based technologies. Optical processors do exist, but they have found only a few applications outside of Fourier transforms, pattern recognition, and optical correlation2; yet, optical processing remains an active field of research still today3. The fundamental challenge in optical computing is the nature of photons that do not interact with each other in the vacuum but require a nonlinear medium. Optical transistors have been proposed in a number of arrangements, such as in atomic ensembles4,5,6 and in a semiconductor microcavity7. Optical gates and switches have been studied with various nonlinear components, such as semiconductor optical amplifiers8,9,10,11,12, and waveguides and resonators13,14,15,16,17. Further on, metamaterials have been explored for both analogue and digital computations18,19,20.
A wide variety of injection-locked laser based signal processing arrangements have been proposed for telecommunications and all-optical computing. For instance, in telecommunications, the lasers have been used for enhancement of modulation bandwidth21, carrier phase recovery and regeneration22, phase-preserving amplitude limiting23, and orthogonal separation of amplitude and phase24. In the field of all-optical computing, the injection-locked gain-modulated lasers (later referred as the gain-modulation method) have been used to demonstrate a number of logic gates (NOT25,26,27, NOR25,26,27,28, AND26,28, OR26,28, NAND26,29,30,31, XNOR29, XOR28), switches32,33,34,35,36, a bit-error monitor37, a digital adder29, a comparator38, flip-flops39,40,41, and data packet header processing33,34.
Arrangements of the gain-modulation method share the same fundamental principles of operation. Namely, the injected data signal takes part in mode-competition process inside the laser active medium, where the emission is altered by the interaction between the electromagnetic fields of the data signal (of some wavelength λ1), naturally occurring intracavity fields, and other possibly injected fields (control signals, other data streams etc), each possessing its own particular wavelength λi. This mode-competition process is strongly nonlinear and provides useful phenomena, such as hysteresis that can be used for switching. The changes in the mode-competition process, and thus changes of gain for a specific wavelength of light, rely on mutual variations of the injected powers. That is, the injected light, the data and the control signals alike, are amplitude-shift keyed (ASK). When the laser emission is coupled with a suitable bandpass filter, the output will manifest ASK encoded power levels, yet, often with a converted wavelength. Given proper management of the wavelengths and injected signal powers, operations can be combined and even complex functionalities can be realized.
When aiming for an integrated large scale signal processing, a particular challenge of many optical processing schemes is to cascade operations economically. A practical optical cascade requires logic level restoration, unaltered wavelength of operation, and unmodified encoding of signal42,43.
In this Paper we propose an all-optical computing primitive based on normalization operations of injection-locked lasers. Based on universal approximation theorem the normalization operations can be used to construct an arbitrary continuous function \(f:{{\mathbb{R}}}^{n}\to {{\mathbb{R}}}^{m}\), with any given accuracy and we demonstrate a Boolean logic with a VCSEL-based all-optical majority gate at a rate of 1 GHz with BER of 10−6 without changes in the operating wavelength or in the signal encoding format, as required for practical cascadability. Using spin-flip model laser rate equations, we show that in steady-state a weakly injection-locked laser may perform a two-dimensional complex normalization operation of linearly polarized electric fields (Supplementary S1) and we simulate an optical full adder and a 3-bit ripple-carry adder (Supplementary S2).
We have proposed an all-optical computing scheme based on normalization operations of injection-locked lasers and demonstrated the scheme with the optical majority logic, where the input and output signals share the same wavelength, the same optical power, and the same signal encoding format; all prerequisites for elaborate circuit designs. Semiconductor lasers are attractive candidates for all-optical processing because they offer scalable wafer level fabrication and integration, which enables inter- and intra-chip optical communications that bypasses expensive electro-optic conversions.
We emulated the combined input of A + B + C with a tandem of an external cavity laser (ECL) with a linewidth of 150 kHz (OSICS ECL 1560/P6), an electro-absorption modulator (EAM), and a phase modulator (PM) that together produced the desired multilevel hybrid encoding (see Figs 4 and 5). Similar emulation of multiple signals is common in telecommunications, particularly in orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems.
Schematic illustration of the measurement setup. Abbreviations: ECL – external cavity laser; PC – polarization controller; EAM – electro-absorption modulator; PM – phase modulator; BPG – bit pattern generator; EDFA – Erbium doped fibre amplifier; OF – optical filter; ATT – variable optical attenuator; OC – optical circulator; PD – p-i-n photodiode; OSA – optical spectrum analyser; DLI – delay line interferometer; BERT – bit error rate tester; Osc. – digitizing oscilloscope.
To experiment the logic gate regime, the bit streams of A and B were each given 128 randomly generated bits (not using linear feedback shift registers, but a computer-generated sequence of Fig. 4) and the signal C was sequentially switched between 0 and 1 for each operation. The respective multilevel phase-modulated signal had relative power levels of 1 and 9, i.e., the extinction ratio (ER) of 9.54 dB, and the phase shifts of 0 and π. The EAM and PM were each controlled by separate bit pattern generators (BPG) Anritsu MP1755A and Advantest D3186, respectively, that provided independent bit patterns at a rate of 1 Gbit/s. The BPGs were synchronized in time such that the modulated optical amplitude and phase symbols coincided. The PM output was coupled to an erbium-doped fibre amplifier (EDFA), an optical tunable bandpass filter (OF), and a variable attenuator (ATT) in order to control and optimize the optical power of the seeding signal. During the preparation, the setup was experimented with shift-register-based PRBSs with dissimilar word lengths of 29 − 1 and 27 − 1 that were fed to EAM and PM, respectively.
The seeding signal was coupled into the slave laser (commercial single-mode VCSEL by VERTILAS GmbH) via an optical circulator (OC), which directed the returning signal into a second EDFA and a second OF. The phase of an optical signal cannot be measured directly from the optical power, but it has to interfere with some known reference, which in our case was a preceding symbol. Thus, we measured a differential phase of pulses in the spirit of differential phase-shift-keyed (DPSK) demodulated output using a delay-line interferometer (DLI, by Kylia) with free spectral range of 1 GHz. A single output of the DLI was measured with a p-i-n photodiode (HP 11982A) that was connected to a BERT (Advantest D3286). The expected bit sequence of the DPSK modulated output was preprogrammed into the BERT, which counted the errors.
In this setup the ratio between optical injection and optical output21 Pinj/Pout ≈ 4 dB. We permitted the positive ratio, because our objective was to optimize the BER, not the power budget. In practice, BER was in minimum when the slave VCSEL was pumped only slightly above its lasing threshold that in turn enabled the maximal speed of operation. Indeed, the power budget, the speed of operation, and the achieved BER are interdependent; and furthermore, they are dependent on internal laser properties, such as the linewidth enhancement factor α, the decay rate of the cavity field, and the decay rate of the carrier number. In our experiment we optimized the BER in expense of the power. This should not be interpreted as a statement concerning the power budget of laser based normalization operations, merely just specifics of this particular experiment. By use of another objectives of the experiment, and possibly another type of a laser, one may tailor and optimize the performance. To optimize the power budget the linewidth enhancement factor α of a laser should be minimized–preferably to nil.
As known in the art, the optimal regime of injection locking, and thus normalization operations, is obtained when the detuning between ECL master and VCSEL slave approaches zero. We optimized the injection locking by setting the wavelength of the ECL close to free-running wavelength of the VCSEL and then detuning was minimized by adjusting the VCSEL pump current (as the amount of pumping is known to determine the emission wavelength of a laser diode). While the semiconductor laser locking and thus the emission properties are highly dependent on the amount of detuning between the master and slave lasers, the fine-tuning of the pump power enables minimization of the BER. To avoid thermal drift of the VCSEL free-running wavelength due to environmental conditions, temperature of the VCSEL wafer was controlled with the TEC system. In free-running state the VCSEL emission has a vastly broader bandwidth than the ECL, yet, as known in the art, the slave adopts, or at least imitates, the properties of the master21. As a consequence, in the locked state the VCSEL emission bandwidth resembles the one of the ECL. Depending on both the pump current and the resulting detuning, an optimal optical injection power was set to minimize the BER of the received demodulated DPSK signal.
The measurement of the BER was performed by gradual degradation of the signal quality by increase of the ER of the hybrid encoded symbols. To compare the injection locked results with the non-injection locked reference, we measured the BER with and without the presence of the slave laser. In practice, the measurement setup had a 50/50 coupler whose other arm was used as the reference (dashed arrow in Fig. 5) that at times was connected to the input of the DPSK receiver (open dot in Fig. 3) instead of the optical output of the circulator.
