Land and building separation based on Shapley values
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-020-0444-1
The total value apportionment between land and building components remains an international issue both in theory and in practice. There are several concepts and methods of value separation, each leading to approximate estimations and therefore to divergent opinions about their reliability. In this paper, we present an alternative method of value apportionment based on Shapley’s scheme of values, well recognized in the coalitional game theory. The practicality of this method is verified using observed prices of 14,715 residential properties sold during the year 2019 over all the 27 districts in Montreal (Canada). This unique data comes with detailed information about the essential attributes of the land and the building components. The empirical results of the method presented in this work are in line with practical expectations of total and separate values, either taken case-by-case or in aggregation per district. They are indeed encouraging when compared to the results of two other independent methods (i.e., the city evaluations and the OLS predictions) for the same properties. The results are interesting not only regarding the separation of value but also in several other related aspects. For instance, land values are often close to or even higher than the building values. This shows a phenomenon of building depreciation and land value appreciation. Some districts seem to favor the quality of the building, others being influenced by the location and quality of the land. Interestingly, in contrast to what is believed in practice, a good quality parcel of land does not necessarily have a good quality building according to the results.
The separate estimation of the land and its building in practice is more challenging than global value estimation. In theory, there are diverging opinions on the separability/inseparability of value between the two components, raising concerns especially about the imputation of revenues to its agents of production and the impact of different systems of taxation. Classically, the inseparability thesis was assumed by Ely (1922), Russell (1945), Ratcliff (1950), Fisher (1958), and Dorau and Hinman (1969), and it is restated in some of the contemporary literature (Mills, 1998; Connellan (2004); Fischel, 2000; Kitchen, 2003; Hendriks, 2005). The consensus is that apportionment is not practicable (and is useless) because land and improvements are merged together like in an “omelet”. However, in contrast, several early (George, 1881; Smith, 1886; Marshall, 1922) and contemporary authors (Brueckner, 1986; Rice, 1982) defended separability. As these explanations are essentially theoretical, some responses are expected from those working in the field. Perhaps because of the same theoretical uncertainties, priority is usually given to global value estimation, which is often needed for taxation (Andelson, 2000).
The land and the building components (of a property) each have specific characteristics making them types of capital that are more different than alike and thus requiring separate values (Gaffney, 1994; Gihring, 1999). Separate values are relevant everywhere and concern all types of properties, especially those in residential urban areas for which the land market is scarce and classical methods are ineffective. Land and building values coexist and shape the dynamics of real estate markets in a specific way. In developed urban areas, land value progressively catches up to the value of the improvements, and sometimes goes much higher (Bourassa et al., 2011). Many practical situations require separate estimations, for example, city and capital gains taxation, tax incidences (Gloudemans, 2001), challenges by contributors in courts (Keligian, 1994), applicability of the cost method for the portion of improvements (Appraisal Institute, 2013), decisions about option value and amortization (Dye and McMillen, 2007), volatility of land and building values over time (Davis and Palumbo, 2008), management of insurances and mortgages (Guofang et al., 2003), sound land use policies and practices (Dancaescu, 2000), and preparation of land value maps (Ohno, 1985).
The value scheme of Shapley (1953), combined with fuzzy logic, has been thoroughly examined in coalitional game theory models. It is almost absent in real estate analysis and valuation. The main contribution of this work is the application of Shapley value concept in real estate valuation as an alternative method to separate the total value of a residential property between its land and building components, following a game theory framework. We also contribute in several other ways by extending the convenient Shapley method, notably with the integration of the fuzzy logic set of values in the Gaussian function in a way that reflects the capacity of subsets of property attributes. These capacities are optimized under several logical constraints and an error minimization process.
Shapley method offers an occasion to appreciate related, important issues of value separation, such as the optimal timing and location to rebuild/change the existing structure/usage (for instance, when land values are significantly higher than the depreciated building values). The method is helpful for investors and planners to appreciate per district if the quality of land and improvements goes together; some districts may favor the quality of the building, others being influenced by the quality of the location.
The use of the game theory basis, Shapley’s global value and fuzzy logic contribute to reviving interest on the separation issue, especially in regions where the land market is scarce. Direct attention to the value separation difficulties and the subtleties within Shapley’s special method make it more palpable in practice, in contrast to an approach that takes them for granted or leaves them to speculation. The Shapley method tangibly promotes a coherent system of separate and total value estimations for professionals working in both case-by-case and mass evaluation contexts. The following describes the conceptual bases of this method, tested with a practical application in the case of the housing market in Montreal (Canada).
Thus far, we have prepared the data and the cumulative capacity of μ(X) values in Table 3, needed for the application of the Shapley method. Considering that all the lands are built (improved) in the data, normalized and weighted correlations of land and building attributes are used as initial values. The Gaussian cumulative distribution of capacities is computed under the scheme of Shapley’s axioms and Sugeno’s criteria of non-linear monotonic increase of contributions. Instead of considering the expert’s subjective opinion on these contributions, the Gaussian function works with the correlations between property attributes and observed prices.
Shapley’s separate values are computed based on a key assumption we made. Accordingly, when the observed prices of comparables are correctly adjusted by their attributes of various importance, in comparison to those of the subject, they are theoretically supposed to be the same or, at least, very close. To objectively conduct this process, we allowed weights of attributes to change under the optimization process of price convergence that automatically connects all the steps of Shapley’s separate value estimations. When these weights change, prices of comparables are adjusted with error minimization. Weighting optimization stops when the total distance between the adjusted prices is minimized.
As shown in Table 4, the optimal weights of L1, L2, B1, and B2 attributes are, respectively, 0.16, 0.24, 0.40, and 0.20. Based on these weights, Shapley method computed an indication of capacity for each attribute of the subject property (S) in the example, allowing to estimate separate values. Accordingly, for the subject property, the estimated separate value for the building is $259,304 (57%) and $195,616 (43%) for the land.
For the test, we used correlations without optimization which resulted in a RMSE of 0.039, in comparison to a RMSE of 0.011 for the optimized weights. The adjusted prices with optimization are very close to the observed price of the subject property and, consequently, suggest closer separate values for land and building components. The RMSE optimization process allowed to tune Shapley’s separate values based on the essential argument of price convergence. Other statistical approaches like the OLS derive marginal contributions of attributes based on price differentials and use these contributions for price adjustments in later steps from which an opinion on the market value of land and building is reached. In Shapley’s method, integrating the RMSE process, any slight adjustment in the weight of a given attribute simultaneously changes all the interconnected measures in the algorithm of computation.
Do these separate values make sense or are they in line with the practical expectations? Even though they are in line with practice, direct response cannot be provided with this single example; we thus need to consider a higher number of cases as in the data per district. Using the same algorithm, we computed separate estimations for all the other 14,714 properties in the data, considering each time their own three comparables. Also, a comparison with the separate results of the same properties in the data obtained by the two other independent methods (i.e., city and OLS) are more enlightening.
Table 5 displays the average results of the method per district, sorted in increasing order of the observed prices. The results are interesting not only regarding the separation but also in several other related aspects. For instance, the land values are close to or even higher than the building values in certain districts; the inverse is usually the case. This shows a phenomenon of building depreciation and land value appreciation in the districts close to downtown areas such as Verdun and Westmount. Interestingly, those two districts are on opposite sides of the market. In Westmount, like in Verdun, the buildings are mostly old and this probably reflects the reticence of the market due to the exponential increase of residential property values (and taxes) on lands that have a huge potential in rent. When the districts are far apart, the land values usually decrease, with a better quality of buildings.
The distribution of the bargaining power of the four attributes demands particular attention per district. We can observe where clearly the size and the quality of the land and building dominate. These results imply that we cannot consider and interpret a uniform distribution of the so-called “hedonic contribution” on the utility of each attribute. It varies considerably in space, depending on the district in which the attributes are in competition. Some districts seem to favor the quality of the building (with the maximum bargaining power of 0.664 in Anjou), others being influenced by the size of the land (like 0.385 in Ile-des-Soeurs). And most interestingly, in contrast to what is believed in practice, a good quality parcel of land does not necessarily have a good quality building according to these average results per district.
The bargaining powers of the L1, L2, B1, and B2 are respectively 0.219, 0.155, 0.294, and 0.332. These average values are in coherence with the observations in practice. The ratio of land to total value oscillates between 0.195 and 0.631, with an average of 0.374 for all the districts. In comparison, the average ratio of the land is 0.348 in the case of the city evaluations (values between 0.187 and 0.511) and 0.399 according to the OLS model (with values between 0.194 and 0.626).
The following figure gathers the behavior of the results of the land and the building in four different districts selected from the data (the price of the land is sorted in increasing order) (Fig. 1). By observing Fig. 1a–c, we can discuss several striking interpretations. First, the building values in general closely follow the same trend as the land values, considering districts of Dorval and St-Léonard. Another observation in these districts is the apparent fluctuations of building values in Dorval, but a more stable trend in the values of both components in St-Leonard. This might signify that the increasing values of lands are almost systematically improved with the increasing quality of the buildings. The situation is completely different in the case of Anjou where the building values fluctuate indistinctly in comparison to the slightly increasing values of lands, with a large gap between the values of the two components.
In a–c, land value are clearly lower than the building. It is interesting to notice the building quality fluctuations, which are very similar in St-Léonard. Elsewhere, in Westmount in d, land value is significantly higher according to the Shapley’s improved method, in comparison to city valuations e.
In the bottom part of the same figure, the separate values of the land steadily increase and even overtake the values of the building for most of the properties in Westmount (Fig. 1d). Building values in this district are almost insensitive to the increases in land values, meaning that the capacity of the land is far from being optimized. We can extend this interpretation to the concept of “sleeping rents” on which a political debate can be elaborated. In fact, rents being captured “under the land” might signify a loss of value and consequently less income in property taxes for the municipalities in the long run. Recognition of that situation might motivate politicians to take some incentive measures, such as property tax relief, to encourage a better quality of buildings. Figure 1e shows the separate values of the same lands and the buildings, estimated almost by a rule of thumb, based on a typical ratio that professionals use in the city. This hides the reality of the practical dialectic between the two components and shows at the same time the importance of reliably estimating the separate values.
The separate results of the mass valuation on the map show these patterns, especially interesting from a spatial economics point of view (Fig. 2). They clearly follow what Alonso (1964) described in his bid rent theory, hypothesizing a decreasing pattern of land values with distance from the center of a city. According to separate estimations of Shapley method, the building values are higher around the old high-status markets encircling Mount Royal, while also being present far from downtown areas, especially in the west part of the city (due to the demand for direct access and greater visibility for lands along the border of the St. Lawrence River).
The map interestingly shows a negative correlation between land and building values: in general, lands of higher value accommodating less expensive buildings, and vice versa (verifying here the trade-off between the location and building attributes under income constraints, as Alonso (1964) emphasized).
Value clearly is a fundamental concept and knowledge about the separate contributions of its attributes is important in multiple contexts, for various economic agents. Ignoring separate values of property attributes and avoiding their interactions not only perpetuates the belief that they are meaningless, but it may also eliminate precious information. The issue of value separation is however important and challenging both in theory and in practice (Özdilek, 2012). There are mainly three types of difficulties that are related to the identification/definition of the land and building attributes, the measure of their separate values and the application of a reliable method. Arguments on the separability/inseparability thesis regarding the contributive values have been quite extensive in previous research. There are also several value separation methods in existence, each having some degree of consistency in practice.
This work contributes to the issue of separation by exploring and applying the Shapley scheme of value as a new method, involving both the conceptual basis of game theory and the use of fuzzy logic in the settlement of the initial conditions. This method provides a robust solution, with a relatively simple and accommodating basis, to the issue of separate and total value estimations. It allows professionals to tangibly (and even manually) break down a total value by clearly understanding the computational steps, otherwise uncertainly applied in practice.
Reference to game theory is quite new in a field where the analysts are used to thinking in terms of the marginal contributions of property attributes. The role of the player is given to the attributes in a strategically cooperative (or not) game of value creation/destruction. This parallel is helpful in understanding the attributes of utility that are in a weaker or stronger position to influence the economic deciders who actually play the game. These attributes are in the position to “claim”, as we defend here, their separate part of the contribution in the game (individually or in cooperation). In settling the “rules” and the most probable constraints, the fuzzy measures also provide an interesting solution in taking into account the interactions among the value creating attributes in the game. In that context, we have introduced a Gaussian function that “defuzzifies” the fuzzy measures of probabilities in the set of combinations.
The Shapley method globally provides separate contributions (or payoffs) of property attributes, as shown in this work. The empirical validation of this method rests on the use of an important database from the market of 14,715 sold single-family properties. The results are very coherent and without ambiguity for all the properties within the data. They are in line with practical expectations of values, either taken case-by-case or in aggregation per district. They are indeed encouraging when compared to the results of the city evaluations and the OLS predictions for the same properties and attributes. The results are derived from an objective solution to the difficulty of the separation issue, offering there the occasion to appreciate other related issues from the land-building dialectic, which are usually overlooked or simply ignored.
The Shapley method depends on the reliability of weights of attributes processed as fuzzy measures within the Gaussian function. The initial values based on the correlations of attributes per district are iteratively changed and stabilized under the constraint of the minimization of distances (errors) between the adjusted prices of comparables and the observed price of the subject. Professionals will benefit from the reliability of the method, but most importantly, they can confidently defend and demonstrate that those weights are objectively in line with the theoretical and practical expectance in valuation.
Based on the general framework of the Shapley method that we presented, future work might be interested in several technical aspects to enhance separate values. For instance, we processed direct separation of observed prices based on the Shapley method. Because of the possibility of residual interactions among attributes that can resist after the application of the Shapley’s global approach, an extended version can be elaborated (for instance, by the integration of simultaneous interactions of two or more attributes on other ones in the same framework).
Even though we presented only briefly, the Shapley method also has a coherent framework for the prediction of the separate values. The process of prediction can be submitted to a robust modeling algorithm with feed forwarded and back forwarded learning steps of separation under the constraints to decrease the errors of estimation. This sounds advantageous especially in the context of mass evaluation, but the tangible benefits of the Shapley method might become complex for professionals. There is also the possibility of improving several other steps in the method, such as using another probability distribution function and changing the number of attributes (and their weights). In this perspective, spatial autocorrelation methods can be joined to the Shapley method, especially in improving the explanation portion of the land value. Also, in future work, more discussion on the political issue of the separate system of tax rates (and its consequences) would be beneficial for public finance management. Finally, using Shapley axioms, more sensitive approaches can focus, for instance, on the optimal timing of improving vacant lands and demolishing the depreciated buildings for new constructions.
