What do our future teachers think about terrorism and politically motivated violence in the Basque Country?
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-021-00721-0
Euskadi Ta Askatasuna—Basque Country and Freedom (ETA) was an armed organisation from the Basque Country and after it declared that it would cease violent actions and subsequently disbanded, the Basque Country has been involved in a peace process. The Adi-adian programme that is part of this process has been implemented as a part of teacher training programmes. By means of a mixed model that combines both qualitative and quantitative elements, the present study has attempted to identify the attitudes of future teachers—prior to implementation of Adi-adian—regarding terrorism and politically motivated violence that occurred in and from the Basque country since 1960, the information they have received with respect thereto, and their opinions as to how the issues are dealt with in the classroom. The results obtained reveal a generally respectful attitude toward human rights and the delegitimisation of violence; lack of satisfaction regarding the information they have received throughout their lives; and, as future teachers, a lack of certainty as to how to approach such issues in the classroom. It was noted that these future teachers had a high degree of motivation and interest with respect to these matters.
There have been a great many armed conflicts that have occurred, and that still are occurring, throughout the world. Moreover, attempts have been made to use education as a means to channel said conflicts (Cajani et al., 2019; Quaynor, 2012; Vicent et al., 2020).
During much of the second half of the 20th century and the beginning of the present century, there has been a great deal of political tension in the Basque Country. The most dramatic expression of this tension were the murders and the violation of human rights perpetrated by terrorist groups, as well as by means of violent actions carried out by the State and its security forces (Carmena et al., 2013). Basque society has experienced an anomalous situation marked by terrorism, kidnappings, torture, threats, extortion, exile and, in general, a lack of freedom. The suffering, fear, emotions, and high tensions characteristic of those times have given rise to numerous conflicts among the territory’s citizens. However, after ETA declared an end to violence and subsequently disbanded, the Basque Country entered into a new stage of gradually returning to normality. During this stage, Basque society has been faced with the challenge of learning anew how to coexist on the basis of respect for the memory of victims of past violence.
Public institutions, as well as other diverse entities, have been promoting policies regarding this issue, and the Basque government’s own responsibility for addressing such matters is undeniable. Within the realm of public policy, we have seen initiatives on the part of the Secretary of Peace, Coexistence, and Human Rights of the Basque government, which consists of a series of plans (Gobierno Vasco, 2007, 2010, 2013, 2017). These plans have addressed the way Basque terrorism and political violence are dealt with in educational settings. We can therefore confirm that, from the time of the first educational proposals put forward by the Coordinadora Gesto por la Paz (1997), a course has been embarked on that has at times been controversial (Urkidi et al., 2021), and which culminated in the consolidation of The Adi-adian educational module: Teaching about human dignity, coexistence, and empathy through victim testimony (Gobierno Vasco, s.f.), the main programme of this type currently being implemented in the Basque Country. The purpose of the present research project is to analyse various aspects of this programme’s implementation from the standpoint of teaching in the social sciences, and specifically in the context teacher training in the Basque Country’s public university.
The first objective of the investigation was to identify the prior attitudes of teachers-in-training regarding terrorism and politically motivated violence in and from the Basque Country. Responses to items related to empathy (Table 2) indicate that, even though a minority of the respondents (5.9%) indicated that reparations to victims of violence was of little or no importance, the vast majority (92.6%) expressed total or general agreement with statements regarding recognition of the suffering of victims (item 8), about the importance of being attentive to the suffering of others (94.1%; item 23), and regarding putting oneself in another person’s shoes (98.2%; item 24).
The narratives include 12 references to the subject of empathy, with 10 of the narratives expressing an empathetic attitude. Thus, the respondent to questionnaire P511 indicated that everything experienced by these persons has been unfair; each one of them has suffered in their own way, and they should not be rejected for having different thoughts. On the other hand, P642 wrote that, when it came to talking about this subject, they saw the suffering in the face of other persons, and for this reason never wanted to ask a lot of questions about it, so as not to reawaken those memories and feelings. However, another respondent (P484) indicated that inevitably, because of their convictions and position regarding the subject, they were not able to have a great deal of empathy for persons who held opposing views.
Turning to the responses related to human rights (Table 3), the results of Study 1 indicate that a large majorities of the respondents either totally agreed or somewhat agreed (91.7%) with the notion that a person’s right to life is more important than any political project (item 3); rejected violence that constitutes an attack on human dignity (item 4), while considering the consequences of violence to be negative (item 7). However, differences emerged with respect to the origin of the violence. Thus, while 49% of students were unequivocally against ETA violence (item 9), only 22.5% of students selected the same option in instances in which it was the state that violated basic rights in the name of the fight against terrorism (item 10).
On the other hand, responses to items 3, 4, 9, and 10 indicate that a minority of respondents do justify violence. Item 3 states that the right to life of a person is more important than any political project. Some 9.9% of the student respondents indicated they did not really agree, or that they disagreed, with this assertion, and 1.5% of data were missing. Similarly, responses to item 4, which asserts that violent actions against human dignity should be rejected, 6.9% of responses indicated dissent, with 3.4% of data missing. Responses to item 9, declaring opposition to ETA violence, revealed that 14.8% were in disagreement, with 4.9% of data unreported. Finally, as regards the affirmation that the state violates basic human rights in its fight against terrorism, 22.5% of respondents either did not really agree, or actually disagreed, and 7.8% of the data were missing.
Further results regarding the issue of human rights indicate that the respondents are aware of the need to live on the basis of positive values (item 14), given that 80.19% totally agree with this assertion, while 61.3% indicated that they were aware of the presence of persons in the Basque Country with diverse beliefs and values (item 16). In contrast, only 38.2% expressed total agreement with the assertion of being a tolerant person who accepts and understands the ideas and choices of others, while not necessarily being in agreement with them (item 15). And only 27.5% indicated total agreement with the need to construct a common culture that includes all of those persons (item 17).
As regards the narratives, there are only eight references to the issue of human rights. One of these references mentions respect, while the other seven refer to violation of human rights, the most frequent references being to the number of murders, kidnappings, abuse, or instances of torture—or to lack of recognition of victims. Thus, respondent P405 indicated I did not think that there were so many murders, abuses, kidnappings, instances of torture…by groups who were fighting against the groups that fought for the independence of the Basque Country (e.g. ETA). P439 wrote I thought that they killed people who were involved, that all of the victims were recognised, and that ETA had not killed so many people. As regards the violation of human rights by the State in the name of fighting terrorism, one narrative mentions the policy of dispersion instituted by the Spanish government: We are now paying for the consequences for what happened before. There are political prisoners who continue to be dispersed in different prisons. In addition, the younger generations continue to suffer oppression today…the Basque Country continues to be under attack because of its past (P645).
Another item relevant to human rights has to do with the extent to which peace prevails in the Basque Country, and the freedom to express one’s opinions there. In this connection, respondent P425 wrote the following: In this society, there is theoretically freedom of opinion and ideas. But a number of experiences that I have had in this programme have confirmed my previous fear: that if your opinion is different from that of the majority of the class, they won’t respect it. In contrast, another respondent (P643) suggests that listening in different ways to ideas and opinions based on different ideologies enabled him to have enough freedom and maturity to form his own ideas.
As regards the addressing of conflicts (Tables 4), 10.8% of the student respondents expressed total agreement with the notion that sometimes persons have no choice but to use violence (item 5). On the other hand, 96% either totally agreed or somewhat agreed that there are better ways than violence to resolve problems (item 6). For items 21 and 22, which respectively, refer to the realisation one attains regarding where they stand regarding a conflict and the attempt to analyse how to constructively confront a problem, 8.3% of data were unreported.
As regards the narratives, although there are expressions of not knowing how to deal with such a sensitive subject, 13 out of the 15 narratives express a positive attitude vis-a-vis addressing conflicts. Respondent P546 expressed their fear of not knowing how to manage conflict situations, although it is an important subject to work on. P412 wrote that, as future primary education teachers, it will be of fundamental importance to know how to deal with conflicts. Another student (P19) indicated that violence constitutes legitimate political action, although it is necessary to have the support of large segments of society in order to be able to repair the damage done.
The results summarised in Table 5 indicate that students were capable of distinguishing negative feelings from positive feelings (item 26), and of reflecting on the source of negative feelings (item 25).
The results of Study 2 offer only two references to the management of emotions. Respondent P454 mentioned the fear of not knowing how to manage a conflict situation, while P463 wrote that before beginning the project, I was afraid of talking about the Basque conflict, since we generally deal with it in a subjective way, considering one ideology as right and the other as wrong. For that reason, I was afraid of dealing with the subject: because of what others would think, wondering if they would think the same way as I do.
Table 6 displays the results of those items related to the peace process. As regards item 11, only 12.3% of student respondents indicated that there is currently a climate of peace in the Basque Country, while 29.9% either do not really agree, or frankly disagree with this assertion. Similarly, only 15.7% of students totally agreed that they feel free to express in public what they think about terrorism and the violation of human rights in the Basque Country (item 27). Also worthy of note is the fact that 82.4% of participants would be committed to participating in actions that promote peace and coexistence (item 29), while 84.3% accord a high degree of importance to the acceptance of and reparations to victims of human rights violations in the Basque Country (item 28).
The narratives reflect a great deal of interest and motivation on the part of students vis-à-vis the subject (Table 7). P837 wrote: I have always been interested in Basque history and culture, the conflicts that occurred in the Basque Country, and how the society in which we live reflects the importance of all this. It is important to sometimes have programmes of this kind (P803). P825 indicated that it is an interesting subject, and I think that it is indispensable for being able to understand the situation that we are living in today, while P640 asserted that it seems very important to me to be aware of what has happened in our land. Finally, P3 wrote: I think that it is something positive to work on the history of the recent past (especially on the subject of conflict) in class, and to use primary sources in doing so.
As for the results with respect to the second objective—the treatment of the subject in schools (Table 8)—one can readily see the difference in the responses offered to the three different items. While 85% of students completely agreed with the idea of encouraging people to have positive social values such as solidarity, equality, etc. (item 13), only 59.3% totally agreed with the notion of conducting activities for the purpose of looking for alternatives to violent behaviour (item 12). In addition, fewer than 50% of the respondents ascribed positive value to the idea of it being possible to speak in schools of the socio-political reality in order to engender a commitment to active engagement (item 18). It is also noteworthy that 10.3% of respondents were not in agreement with the assertion of item 18, and that 3.4% of the data related to this item were unreported.
Respondents who mentioned it in their narratives (Table 9) felt that working on this subject with children could be difficult and hard; that it wasn’t worth mentioning in order to avoid conflict (P480); that it is a dangerous subject to bring up; and that it is better not to mention it and to let each have their own beliefs (P422). According to respondent P25, it is a deep and complex subject, and it isn’t easy to decide which methodology would be best for bringing this kind of subject into the classroom. On the other hand, others thought that it is important to work on the subject with primary school students (P447), because it is a historical event that occurred in the place where we were born, and therefore it is a subject that should be addressed in all of the schools of the Basque Autonomous Community (P837) or because we have a lack of information (P629).
The third objective of this paper concerns the quality, nature, and sources of information received by students regarding terrorism and politically motivated violence in and from the Basque Country beginning in the year 1960. The results of Study 1 (Table 10) show that the primary source of information was the family, followed by mass media and then the school (item 1).
In contrast, the sources mentioned most frequently in the narratives in Study 2 (Table 11) are the school setting (i.e., primary school and secondary school), family (i.e., parents and grandparents) and visual media (i.e., documentaries and/or movies). Respondent P13 mentioned that, as regards the Basque conflict, I have always been curious about why, how, and even where things happened. To find out, I would often ask at home, and I have tried to have discussions with acquaintances, and to look up information on the internet.
In response to the question as to the degree of satisfaction with the information that had been received (item 2) of Study 1, the majority of students expressed dissatisfaction (Table 12).
Among the narratives for Study 2, there were 51 respondents who mentioned having known something about the subject prior to participation in the Adi-adian programme. One respondent indicated that, prior to participating in the programme, I had little information about the “Basque Conflict” and its victims, although I did have rudimentary knowledge of the subject (P801). The narratives offered reflect students’ lack of satisfaction with the information that they had previously received. Thus, respondent P629 felt that the year that they worked the most on the subject was in the history course during the second year of baccalaureate, but not in the way that they would have liked, because there was some information that was not provided. P447 expressed similar sentiments, writing that, after having dealt with this subject in class in a number of papers, exercises, and surveys, it has to be said that they had a lot of disinformation. One participant (P18) indicated that they did not know about the subject, and that most of the information they received during the project was new.
The results pertaining to politically motivated violation of human rights occurring in and perpetrated from the Basque Country within recent memory, are very similar to those obtained in other studies (Elzo et al., 2009; Gobierno Vasco, 2004; Usón, 2017). In general terms, the future teachers who were the subjects in this study were clearly in favour of respecting human rights, and of rejecting violence. In addition, subjects generally displayed empathy and sensitivity to the suffering of victims, and were in favour of providing reparations to those victims. Furthermore, the respondents in this study were inclined to take an active role in the maintenance of peace. However, as Elzo et al. (2009) reported, it is possible to catch a glimpse of a small minority of participants who seem to justify violence, and who have difficulties in understanding “the other”. Such is the case of persons who do not place life above a political project, who do not unequivocally reject violence against persons or the violence perpetrated by ETA, and who do not recognise either the need to construct an inclusive culture, or to provide reparations to victims. It is rather more complicated to interpret the responses of those persons who acknowledge not always having been able to avoid violence. These responses are probably justified owing to the complexity involved in managing conflicts, and to the many different degrees of violence, given that there was nearly unanimous agreement among respondents that violence is not the best way to resolve problems. On the other hand, less than one quarter of participants clearly and categorically acknowledge violence on the part of the State. Even though the State itself has acknowledged perpetrating violence, this only occurred a few years ago (Landa, 2008; Carmena et al., 2013). For this reason, the results obtained may be a consequence of the transmission of an officially sanctioned memory that has silenced part of the history (Arnoso et al., 2018).
In order to assure a future that is more inclusive and open to coexistence, the objective should be to put an end to the following tendencies noted in the results of the present study: the justification of violence (Elzo et al., 2009); the fear associated with these issues (Larrinaga et al., 2020), and the perception that there is room for improvement when it comes to coexistence (Gabinete de prospección sociológica-Gobierno Vasco, 2018). But, in addition to providing citizenship education, we should not forget that we are also training teachers and that, given the difficulties that teachers have in incorporating and dealing with issues of conflict in the classroom (Gobierno Vasco, 2004; Quaynor, 2012; Skaras and Breidlid, 2016; Toledo et al., 2015; selfcite; Vidal de Almeida, 2019; Zembylas et al., 2011), it is absolutely essential to provide our future teachers the tools that they need in order to properly deal with these kinds of situations, as Quaynor (2012) argues.
As we have discovered, there are those who believe that there is not really peace within the Basque Country in which we live. There are also those who do not believe that they can express themselves freely. In addition, in spite of a majority who feel otherwise, there are persons who have reservations about approaching these issues in the classroom. What all this shows is the difficulty in bringing an end to a conflict that has become deeply rooted over the course of many years. For this reason, it is all the more necessary, however complicated it may be to confront these difficult events (Rubin and Cervinkova, 2019) and to overcome the fears of teachers about fomenting discord in the classroom (Quaynor, 2012; Toledo et al., 2015; Vidal de Almeida, 2019; Zembylas et al., 2011), that we see the presentation in the classroom of the history of violence and terrorism in the Basque Country as an opportunity, especially as it relates to the teacher training. A proper understanding of what occurred—one that eschews any kind of distorted equivalence in the damage caused (Tegger, 2015)—could lead to a change in attitude among the population. Over and apart from an ethical commitment to education aimed at remembering what happened in order to prevent it from being repeated (Cuesta, 2011), and of offering youth the information that they do not know (Felices de la et al., 2019; Usón, 2017) and are demanding (Espinosa et al., 2019; Montanares, 2017), the objective should be to educate teachers who promote the kind of citizenship education (Sen, 2019) that safeguards the fundamental rights of all persons in the face of any conflict that might arise. As regards this issue, today’s students who will become the teachers of tomorrow recognise the importance the work that takes place in schools—work that strives to identify alternatives to violence, and that seeks to foment the acquisition of positive values, as recommended by Garaigordobil (2009). The benefits of which have also been set forth in a number of different international studies (Finkel and Ernst, 2005; Soule, 2000; Quaynor, 2015).
Thus, with a view to optimising the usefulness of the present study, we think it fitting to follow the guidelines set forth by Arnoso et al. (2018), who contend that history should be dealt with in a way that is conscious, reflective, and critical, but without drifting into biased viewpoints. It also seems appropriate to encourage, in opposition to the central role so long held by violence, the development of positive emotions, as recommended by Garaigordobil (2009). This last factor is interesting in terms of the work on emotional education that is advocated by Silva-Peña and Paz-Maldonado (2019). On the other hand, Garaigordobil (2009) also thought it important that these kinds of programmes be accompanied by activities that encourage conflict resolution, and this is something that is even more interesting to us in the case of educating future teachers. In addition, both Garaigordobil (2009) and Ruiz and Salazar (2014) emphasised the important role of the school and the family, which in our view should be taken into account in the design of any programming that incorporates the Adi-adian module. All of this should be implemented in a way that promotes peaceful and inclusive environments that facilitate the dispelling of fears over speaking about the subject, and that provides space for the experiencing and expression of emotions.
As regards sources of information, the majority of students expressed clear dissatisfaction with the information that they had received—a finding consistent with previous studies (Usón, 2017). What this finding shows is that subjects such as those addressed in this study that deal with social conflict are not often dealt with in certain sectors of society. As has been established in previous studies conducted in the Basque Country (Elzo et al., 2009; Larrinaga et al., 2020) and in contexts outside of Spain (Vidal de Almeida, 2019), it has been conclusively shown that the family is an important source of information, as are schools and mass media (Reidy et al., 2015; Usón, 2017).
On the other hand, friends are not often referred to as a source of information, which leads to the conclusion that the subject is not something that is spoken of among peers (Larrinaga et al., 2020). This may be because it is a subject that seems remote to young people. However, this finding flies in the face of the motivation that youth claim to have as regards learning about the subject, as shown in the present study as well as in other studies of the Basque Country (Gobierno Vasco, 2004; Usón, 2017) and in other former conflict zones such as Northern Ireland (Vidal de Almeida, 2019). This leads us to conclude that the reason that the subject is not spoken of might be the lack of social space to do so, as described by Reyes et al. (2016) with reference to Chile; the fear of expressing one’s opinion (Larrinaga et al., 2020; Usón, 2017); or the fear of dealing with situations that are emotionally complicated (Rubin and Cervinkova, 2019).
