Reduction of dopant ions and enhancement of magnetic properties by UV irradiation in Ce-doped TiO2
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87115-z
We report the experimental observation of and theoretical explanation for the reduction of dopant ions and enhancement of magnetic properties in Ce-doped TiO2 diluted magnetic semiconductors from UV-light irradiation. Substantial increase in Ce3+ concentration and creation of oxygen vacancy defects in the sample due to UV-light irradiation was observed by X-ray and optical methods. Magnetic measurements demonstrate a combination of paramagnetism and ferromagnetism up to room temperatures in all samples. The magnetization of both paramagnetic and ferromagnetic components was observed to be dramatically enhanced in the irradiated sample. First-principle theoretical calculations show that valence holes created by UV irradiation can substantially lower the formation energy of oxygen vacancies. While the electron spin densities for defect states near oxygen vacancies in pure TiO2 are in antiferromagnetic orientation, they are in ferromagnetic orientations in Ce-doped TiO2. Therefore, the ferromagnetically-oriented spin densities near oxygen vacancies created by UV irradiation are the most probable cause for the experimentally observed enhancement of magnetism in the irradiated Ce-doped TiO2.
Titanium-dioxide-based diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS) have been widely considered as promising ferromagnetic material possibly useful for spintronic applications. The structures, electronic states, and magnetic properties in transitional metal-doped TiO2 have been previously studied1,2,3,4. However, despite reports of successful materials synthesis and favorable magnetic properties, questions remain regarding the origin of the materials’ magnetism and consequently their applicability in spintronics5. On the other hand, it is possible that the intrinsically non-magnetic CeO2 may undergo magnetic phase transition when oxygen vacancy defects (VO) are introduced to the material. As reported in a recent paper, UV-irradiated CeO2 indeed demonstrates enhanced room-temperature ferromagnetism6. UV irradiation is thought to generate oxygen vacancies, converting a substantial fraction of constituent Ce4+ into subvalent Ce3+ and thus enhancing ferromagnetic ordering in the ceria sample. It is therefore conceivable that a new species of TiO2-based DMS may be obtained by doping Ce into titanium dioxide hosts followed by UV irradiation.
In the present work, we have used rare-earth element Ce as a replacement for transition metal ions in the synthesis of TiO2-based DMS. The Ce-doped ceria samples were irradiated with UV light to progressively increase the concentration of subvalent Ce3+ ions. X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) techniques were employed to monitor the changes in Ce3+ concentration and the number of oxygen vacancies surrounding Ce, respectively. It has been demonstrated recently that the Ce-L-edge XANES data are especially useful for studying the magnetic and catalytic properties in doped CeO2 nanoparticles7,8. The variation of band gaps as a result of UV irradiation was also determined by UV–Vis diffuse reflectance measurements. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were used to investigate the change of defect states due to UV irradiation. Finally, the magnetic property changes were experimentally observed by using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and theoretically understood by performing first-principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
The Ce XANES of samples with different UV-light irradiation time durations are shown in Fig. 2a. The peak ascribed to Ce3+ increases with the irradiation time, representing reduction of Ce4+ as a result of UV irradiation. To extract Ce3+ concentration from XANES data, the spectra were curve-fitted with an arctangent function to simulate the edge jump and Gaussian functions for peak features. Details of the curve-fitting method have been previously reported10. It’s worth noting that application of Ce-L-edge XANES on the studies of magnetism and photocatalysis in doped CeO2 has also been reported recently7,8. As shown in Fig. 2b, after 600 min of UV-light irradiation, the Ce3+ concentration increased from 23.9% and saturated at 68.6%. Figure 2c shows the Ti XANES of the samples before and after UV-light irradiation. Notably, despite the dramatic changes observed in Ce XANES, the Ti XANES showed the same spectrum even after 600 min of UV-light irradiation, representing an unchanged or at most marginally affected Ti valence state.
(a) Ce L3-edge XANES of UV-light irradiated sample with various irradiation times. (b) Plot of Ce3+ concentration vs. irradiation time. (c) Ti K-edge XANES of sample before and after 600 min of UV-light irradiation.
The Ce L3-edge and Ti K-edge EXAFS analyses were also performed using the ARTEMIS package11 to probe the local structural variations due to UV-light irradiation surrounding the Ce dopant atoms and Ti constituent atoms, respectively, in Ce-doped TiO2. As shown in Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table S1 online, the as-made sample has one O shell at 2.13 ± 0.01 Å and a Ti shell at 3.18 ± 0.02 Å from the Ce central atom, with coordination numbers 5.7 ± 0.5 and 3.4 ± 0.3, respectively. The Ce–O bond length of 2.13 Å observed in the as-made sample is substantially shorter than that of 2.34 Å in the fluorite ceria structure. However, except for longer interatomic distances due to larger ionic radius of Ce4+ (87 pm) compared to that of Ti4+ (61 pm), the local structural parameters for Ce in the as-made sample resemble those for Ti in TiO2, in which 6 O atoms and 4 Ti atoms are located at 1.95 Å and 3.04 Å from the central Ti central atom, respectively. We therefore conclude that the Ce dopant atoms in the as-made Ce-doped TiO2 sample are most likely substitutionally incorporated into the host matrix, occupying Ti sites in TiO2. After 600 min of UV-light irradiation, as listed in Supplementary Table S1 online, the coordination number of the (O) nearest neighboring shell is reduced from 5.7 to 3.8, representing the formation of O vacancy surrounding the Ce dopant atoms as a result of UV irradiation. This is consistent with the Ce XANES results that Ce4+ is reduced to Ce3+ due to UV-light-induced Ce–O bond breakage in the irradiated sample.
(a) Ce L3-edge and (b) Ti K-edge EXAFS data for the sample before and after 600 min of UV-light irradiation. Fine lines: experimental; Coarse lines: curve fitting. Curves have been shifted vertically for the sake of clarity.
In contrast to the Ce local structure which can be substantially changed by UV irradiation, the local structure surrounding Ti atoms appears to remain largely intact after 600 min of UV-light irradiation. As shown in Fig. 3b, the Fourier transform of the Ti EXAFS χ-function for the irradiated sample generally resembles that for the as-made sample. Within fitting uncertainties, the final values of the local structural parameters obtained from curve-fittings for the irradiated samples are also unchanged from those for the as-made samples (Supplementary Table S2 online). Therefore, our EXAFS analysis is consistent with the XANES results that UV irradiation changes the local chemical environment surrounding Ce dopant atoms without inducing substantial variation to that surrounding Ti constituent atoms in the TiO2 host.
The band gap values of the as-made sample and the samples irradiated for different time durations were extracted from the UV–Vis diffuse reflectance data using the Kubelka–Munk function12 and Tauc’s plots13 as shown in Fig. 4. The 2.8 eV (E1) band gap value for the as-made sample is smaller than the reported 3.2 eV indirect band gap of anatase TiO214. According to the DFT calculations published by Albuquerque et al.15, the Ce4+ (4f0) band for Ce dopant atoms deep in bulk TiO2 completely overlaps with the Ti 3d band while those for the subsurface and surface Ce atoms are just below and well below the Ti 3d states, respectively. The observed band-gap narrowing is ascribed to the presence of a Ce4+ impurity band in the energy gap that extends past the conduction band minimum of TiO2 due to Ce doping.
Plot of \({(\alpha hv)}^{1/2} \mathrm{vs.} hv\) deduced from the UV–Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of UV-light irradiated sample with various irradiation times.
For the UV-light irradiated sample, it was observed that a band-tailing effect progressively emerged with increase in irradiation time. As shown in Fig. 4, the initially smooth \({(\alpha hv)}^{1/2} \mathrm{vs. }hv\) curve is gradually lowered in the region from 2.8 to 3.4 eV and raised in that from 1.9 to 2.8 eV due to UV-light irradiation. Consequently, the energy band gap E1 for the as-made sample gradually split into a smaller gap E2 and a larger gap E3 as the irradiation time increases. As revealed by previous DFT calculations and X-ray measurements, the Ti3+ and Ce3+ defect states spawned by UV-light irradiation formed conduction band tail states that extend into the energy band gap and decreases the band gap value15,16. After 600 min of UV irradiation, the band gap value decreased to 1.9 eV (E2). As a consequence of the Ce4+ to Ce3+ conversion, an additional higher band gap of 3.1 eV (E3) was also observed, which can be attributed to the valance band to Ti4+ transition.
The effects of UV-light irradiation on the sample’s magnetic properties were monitored by SQUID measurements. As revealed in Fig. 5, the M–H curve of the as-made sample exhibits a combination of ferromagnetism and paramagnetism up to room temperatures. After UV-light irradiation, the magnetization in the sample was substantially increased compared to that in the as-made sample. The field cooled (FC) and zero field cooled (ZFC) magnetization measurements under an applied field of 200 Oe also show enhanced magnetization due to UV-light irradiation up to the temperature of 300 K.
(a) M-H curves and (b) FC/ZFC curves of Ce-doped TiO2 sample before and after 600 min of UV-light irradiation. The inset of (a) shows the ferromagnetic component of each curve obtained by subtracting the paramagnetic background from the original curve.
Nanocrystal samples of Ce-doped TiO2 were prepared using a sol–gel method. The crystal structures and particle sizes of the samples were obtained from synchrotron-based XRD using the Scherrer equation. Coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) measurements were employed to determine the Ce concentration of the samples. The Ce-doped TiO2 samples were then irradiated by UV-light from a UVC lamp (6 W, UVGL-58, UVP) with various irradiation time durations in ambient conditions. The Ce L3-edge and Ti K-edge XANES and EXAFS, performed at beamline BL07A of the Taiwan Light Source (TLS) at National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC), were used to reveal the evolution of valances and local structures surrounding Ce and Ti atoms as a result of UV irradiation, respectively. Electronic structural changes due to UV-light irradiation were monitored by UV–Vis diffuse reflectance measurements using a spectrophotometer (UV-4150, Hitachi). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were also measured using an excitation source of wavelength 325 nm to investigate the variation of defect states due to UV-light irradiation. The UV-induced magnetic-property changes were exhibited by the M–H and M–T data obtained by using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Finally, the experimentally observed effects of UV irradiation on Ce-doped TiO2 were theoretically explained by first-principle DFT calculations using the VASP code.
