Photothermal therapy via a gold nanoparticle-coated stent for treating stent-induced granulation tissue formation in the rat esophagus
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-90182-x
Minimally invasive therapies using stent technology are currently limited by stent-induced granulation tissue formation adjacent to the stent. The effectiveness of photothermal therapy (PTT) using a gold nanoparticle (AuNP)-coated stent for treating stent-induced granulation tissue formation in the rat esophagus was investigated. All experiments were approved by the animal research committee of our institution. An AuNP-coated, self-expandable metallic stent (SEMS) was produced to conduct PTT under near-infrared laser irradiation. Forty rats were randomly divided into four groups (10 rats each). The animals in group A (non-coated SEMS) and group B (AuNP-coated SEMS with local heating at 65 °C at 4 weeks) were sacrificed 4 weeks after stent placement. The rats in group C (AuNP-coated SEMS with local heating at 65 °C at 4 weeks) and group D (AuNP-coated SEMS with local heating at 65 °C at 4 and 8 weeks) were sacrificed 8 weeks after stent placement. The effectiveness of local heating was assessed by histopathology. All procedures were successful in all of the animals. Seven rats were excluded because of stent migration (n = 2) and death (n = 5). Granulation tissue formation-related variables were significantly higher in group A than in groups B–D (all p < 0.05). Heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) and TUNEL expression were significantly lower in group A than in groups B–D (all p < 0.05). Granulation tissue formation-related variables were significantly higher in group C than in groups B and D (all p < 0.05). PTT using AuNP-coated SEMS successfully treated granulation tissue formation after stent placement in the rat esophagus.
Esophageal stenting using a self-expandable metallic stent (SEMS) is currently the most common therapeutic strategy for treating malignant and benign diseases1,2,3. The use of SEMS devices is significantly limited however by malignant and/or benign tissue growth through the stent meshes after placement, which can lead to newly developed stricture formation and recurrent symptoms2,3,4,5. Drug-eluting, biodegradable, and nano-functionalized stents have been investigated as possible avenues to overcome this complication but have not been successful in treating stent-induced malignant and/or benign tissue formation6,7,8,9,10,11,12.

Photothermal therapy (PTT) offers a potential therapeutic strategy for cancer cells without significant collateral damage13,14. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have excellent absorption properties in the near-infrared (NIR) spectrum of biological window and their PT-converting efficiency has been studied previously as a possible biomedical application for targeting different diseases13,14,15,16,17,18. Recently, AuNP-based functionalized stents were introduced to locally treat cancer cells or tissue hyperplasia adjacent to stented non-vascular luminal organs11,12,19,20. Park et al. have reported in rat models that locally applied temperature increases (50 to 65 °C) successfully suppressed tissue hyperplasia after esophageal and gastroduodenal stent placement11,20. We hypothesized that AuNP-coated SEMS could be used for localized PTT under NIR laser irradiation. We speculated that this approach would treat stent-induced granulation tissue formation after SEMS placement through the induction of PT-induced cell apoptosis and activation of heat-shock proteins (HSPs). We here investigated the feasibility of this therapy in the rat esophagus.

Stent placement and PTT were technically successful in all the experimental rats. Five of 40 (12.5%) rats (one each in groups A-C and two in group D) died after stent placement due to a hemorrhage caused by the stent barbs at 1–3 days after placement. The AuNP-coated SEMS migrated into the stomach in two rats (one each in groups A and C) within 10 days of placement. The remaining 33 (82.5%) rats survived until the end of the study without stent-related complications (Fig. 2).
Flow diagram showing the randomization process and study follow-ups. Note. PTT; photothermal therapy.
Although the body weights of the rats decreased at 1 week after stent placement and the PTT procedure, this did not significantly affect any of these animals in terms of their condition and behavior. There were also no significant differences between the groups in terms of the body weights after stent placement and the PTT procedure (p > 0.05) (Supplementary Fig. 1).
The cytotoxicity results showed that cell death was not observed, which indicated that the control, PDA-coated, and AuNP-coated stents were nontoxic, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2.
The mean percentage of the tissue-hyperplasia area, the mean thickness of the submucosal fibrosis, the mean number of epithelial layers, the mean degree of the collagen deposition, and the mean degree of TUNEL- and HSP70-positive deposition were significantly different between the groups (all variables, p < 0.001, Kruskal–Wallis test). The mean percentage of tissue-hyperplasia area, mean number of epithelial layers, mean thickness of submucosal fibrosis, and mean degree of collagen deposition were significantly higher in group A than in groups B-D (all variables; p < 0.05) (Fig. 3). However, the mean degrees of HSP70- and TUNEL-positive-deposition were significantly lower in group A than in groups B-D (all variables; p < 0.05) (Fig. 4). The density grade of inflammatory cell infiltration was not significantly different among the four groups (p = 0.726, Kruskal–Wallis test). The mean tissue-hyperplasia area and number of epithelial layers were significantly higher in group C than in groups B and D (all variables; p < 0.05). The mean degree of HSP70-positive-deposition was significantly lower in group C than in groups B and D (all variables; p < 0.05) (Fig. 5). These histological findings are summarized in Supplementary Table 1.
Representative microscopic images of histological sections obtained at 4 weeks (groups A and B) and 8 weeks (groups C and D) after stent placement. Hematoxylin and eosin and Masson’s trichrome stained sections are shown (magnification, × 1.25).
Representative microscopic images of immunohistochemistry sections obtained at 4 weeks (groups A and B) and 8 weeks (groups C and D) after stent placement. HSP70 and TUNEL expression were significantly increased in the heated groups compared to the control group (magnification, × 20).
Histopathological findings for the stented rat esophagus at 4 and 8 weeks after stent placement in groups (A-D); *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Our present results have demonstrated that PTT via an AuNP-coated SEMS under NIR laser irradiation will successfully treat granulation tissue formation after stent placement in the rat esophagus. The granulation tissue was significantly decreased in the PTT groups compared to a control group. PTT-induced cell apoptosis was significantly elevated in the heated esophageal mucosa, and markers of cellular proliferation were significantly decreased after PTT when compared to the control animals. Increases in HSP expression and thermal induced-apoptosis are well-characterized features of the heat shock response, and previous studies have reported that HSP70 is an indicator of heat stress in different species22,23.
Our study groups were evaluated for the rebound effect. The group C rats treated once at 4 weeks after stent placement had a significant increase in granulation tissue formation at 8 weeks compared to the group D animals treated twice at 4 and 8 weeks after stent placement. The tissue-hyperplasia area and number of epithelial layers in group C were found to have gradually increased compared with the group D rats. Our results confirmed that the PTT was more effective when administered every 4 weeks and indicated therefore that periodic PTT seems to be necessary to treat stent-induced granulation tissue formation after stent placement. Further studies with a long-term follow-up are required to confirm our present findings.
Although PTT has been previously reported to successfully treat granulation tissue formation, there is no consensus regarding the optimal temperature for local heating for the treatment of stent-induced granulation tissue formation11,20,24,25,26. Several studies have reported that at 43 to 65 °C can help inhibit tissue hyperplasia but that an increase to 70 °C induced immediate tissue burn11,19,25. In our current study, stent-induced granulation tissue formation in the rat esophagus was effectively treated with AuNP coated SEMS-mediated local heating at 65 °C, which may effectively burn the granulation tissues generated around the stent. Taken together, our present results demonstrated that local heat treatment at 65 °C was optimal for successful PTT.
Our previous studies have reported that an AuNP-coated SEMS can be easily fabricated using simple synthesis steps and is rapidly heated to therapeutic temperatures within a few seconds of NIR laser irradiation11,20. The AuNP-coated SEMS used in our current experiments thus rapidly reached a high temperature, which increased in proportion to the NIR power. Hence, the PT properties could be easily controlled by adjusting the NIR irradiation levels. These properties can be attributed to the anisotropic structural characteristics of AuNP, consistent with our prior results11,20. Our previous studies involved local heat treatment via the AuNP-coated stent under NIR irradiation at one week after stent placement to prevent stent-induced tissue hyperplasia. In our current study, local heat treatment was performed at 4 weeks after granulation tissue formation had already occurred. Restenosis caused by stent-induced granulation tissue formation occurs as an excessive proliferative response within 4 weeks to the mechanical injury caused by stent placement10,11,21. Taken together with previous evidence, our current findings support the notion that local heat treatment via the NIR irradiation of an AuNP-coated stent is an effective therapeutic option for the prevention as well as the treatment of granulation tissue formation after stent placement.
Advances in stent technologies have resulted in a decrease in complications and a prolonged stent patency period. Although a stent has been commonly used as a minimally invasive method to treat malignant and benign esophageal strictures, tissue hyperplasia through the mesh or around the edges of esophageal stents has been reported after the placement of up to 60% of bare stents and 13% of covered stents27,28,29. Hence, permanent stent placement in patients with a relatively long life expectancy has not yet become widespread due to the likelihood of late adverse events, including the development of new strictures caused by stent-induced granulation tissue formation, stent migration, and esophageal ulceration30,31. We believe however that our therapeutic strategy using AuNP-coated SEMS could be applied also to an uncovered SEMS to treat granulation tissue growth, and may prolong stent patency by reducing stent-induced tissue hyperplasia, thus improving the patients' quality of life.
There were some limitations to our study of note. First, our findings may not reflect all of the pathological mechanisms occurring in humans following a stent placement. Second, it is necessary to determine the optimal timing for local heating after stent placement to treat stent-induced granulation tissue formation. Third, we did not evaluate the depth penetration of the AuNP-coated SEMS in the rat esophageal model. Although additional studies will be required to further validate our current data, our study supports the premise that PTT via an AuNP-coated stent can successfully treated stent-induced tissue hyperplasia.
An AuNP-coated SEMS appears to be an effective approach for the local treatment of stent-induced granulation tissue formation in the rat esophagus. An AuNP-coated stent-mediated local PTT protocol could be used for not only to treat granulation tissue formation but also tumor ingrowth or overgrowth though the stent meshes. Although further preclinical studies are needed to investigate its efficacy and safety, this therapeutic strategy shows considerable promise for the treatment of granulation tissue formation after stent placement.
