Availability of risky geoengineering can make an ambitious climate mitigation agreement more likely
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-020-0492-6
Some countries prefer high to low mitigation (H ≻ L). Some prefer low to high (L ≻ H). That fundamental disagreement is at the heart of the seeming intractability of negotiating a climate mitigation agreement. Modelling global climate negotiations as a weakest-link game brings this to the fore: Unless everyone prefers H to L, L wins. Enter geoengineering (G). Its risky and imperfect nature makes it arguably inferior to any country’s preferred mitigation outcome. However, absent a global high-mitigation agreement, countries facing disastrous climate damages might indeed wish to undertake it, effectively ranking H ≻ G ≻ L. Meanwhile, those least affected by climate damages and, thus, least inclined to agree to an ambitious mitigation agreement, might be unwilling to engage in risky geoengineering, resulting in L ≻ H ≻ G. With these rankings, all players prefer H to G, and the mere availability of a credible geoengineering threat might help induce an ambitious climate mitigation agreement (H). The analysis here introduces the simplest possible model of global climate negotiations and derives the conditions for this outcome. These conditions may indeed be likely, as long as geoengineering is viewed as a credible albeit risky emergency response given the danger of low mitigation levels.
Game theory helps frame the strategic interactions among countries (Schelling, 1960), with global climate negotiations as a prominent example (Barrett, 2007, 2003, 1994; MacKay et al., 2015). That holds for multilateral negotiations under the umbrella of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as well as for bilateral negotiations and those among smaller groups of countries. Science points to the need for ambitious climate action (IPCC, 2018). Many countries are indeed pursuing ambitious action on their own (Aklin and Mildenberger, 2018), only in part for strategic reasons (Kotchen, 2018; Nordhaus, 2020, 2015).Footnote 1 Meanwhile, assuming symmetric players in a weakest-link game (Sandler, 1997, chap. 2), as long as one country, or group of countries, prefers high mitigation to low (H ≻ L), while the other prefers L ≻ H, an ambitious negotiated agreement (H) is unlikely. We here introduce what we consider to be the simplest possible game-theoretic framework that demonstrates this lack of an ambitious negotiated climate agreement. Doing so allows us to communicate and synthesize results of previously published research on climate negotiations and geoengineering (G) (e.g., Millard-Ball, 2012; Moreno-Cruz, 2015; Sandler, 2018; Urpelainen, 2012).
We are far from the first to analyse the impact of the mere availability of G on mitigation outcomes (e.g., Keith, 2000; Merk et al., 2016; Quaas et al., 2017; Sandler, 2018; Wagner and Zizzamia, 2020; Weitzman, 2015). Others have indeed argued how the threat of G, coupled with G’s inherent uncertainties, can lead to more ambitious mitigation action within and across countries (Heyen, 2015; Millard-Ball, 2012; Moreno-Cruz, 2015; Urpelainen, 2012; Victor et al., 2009).Footnote 3 Here we boil this reasoning down to its bare essentials, focusing on simple, relative preference ordering of each player over climate outcomes H, L, and G. These players could be singular actors in bilateral negotiations. They could also stand in for groups of players. G’s fundamental characteristics might lead players previously stuck in a low-mitigation equilibrium L to consider H.
For G to induce H, the threat of deploying G must be credible. And it must indeed be a threat—something opting for H can avoid. All that relies on G being risky and shrouded in uncertainty. The more research discovers about G, decreasing its potential risks and uncertainties for everyone, the less it might be able to induce H. Indeed, a new discovery might affect the players’ expected payoffs, making G the worst policy outcome in case of bad news, or the preferred one in case of good news. Conversely, the possibility of G deployed as a supplement to H might have similar effects of helping to induce H, but it may well be too tempting to trade off some mitigation action for moderate geoengineering (Moreno-Cruz et al., 2018).
Lastly, if any player—a singular state, for example, tempted by G to maintain the high-emitting status quo—were to prefer G altogether, the free-driver effect kicks in and G prevails. The only possible solution in such a scenario to prevent the free driver from forcing G upon everyone else: strong governance at the global level, effectively leading to a ban on unilateral G.
The mere availability of G, of course, is no guarantee of inducing H. Viewed in the right light, and with the bare minimum of oft-invoked assumptions, it might help break the decades-long logjam of climate negotiations—both formally at the international level, and informally among smaller groups of state and possibly non-state actors (Reynolds and Wagner, 2019).
The solution relies on a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium among players in a non-cooperative game (Nash, 1951; Selten, 1965).
