Karyotypic and molecular evidence supports the endemic Tibetan hamsters as a separate divergent lineage of Cricetinae
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-89890-1
The genus status of Urocricetus was defined recently based on morphological and molecular data. Even though the amount of evidence for a separate phylogenetic position of this genus among Cricetinae continues to increase, there is still no consensus on its relationship to other groups. Here we give the first comprehensive description of the U. kamensis karyotype (2n = 30, NFa = 50) including results of comparative cytogenetic analysis and detailed examination of its phylogenetic position by means of numerous molecular markers. The molecular data strongly indicated that Urocricetus is a distant sister group to Phodopus. Comparative cytogenetic data showed significant reorganization of the U. kamensis karyotype compared to karyotypes of all other hamsters investigated earlier. The totality of findings undoubtedly means that Urocricetus belongs to a separate divergent lineage of Cricetinae.
The Kam hamster Urocricetus kamensis (Satunin, 1903 [imprint 1902]) is a member of the lineage commonly known as Tibetan hamsters, which is one of the few rodent taxa endemic to the Qinghai-Tibet plateau where it is found at altitudes up to 5200 m above the sea level1. Over the past century, the classification of Tibetan hamsters based on morphological characteristics has been controversial2, 3. Superficial similarity with another group of small hamsters affiliated with the genus Cricetulus Milne-Edwards, 1867 (e.g. C. barabensis (Pallas, 1773); C. longicaudatus (Milne-Edwards, 1867)) has led to the situation where Tibetan hamsters have been traditionally included within the latter genus, often as the subgenus Urocricetus (Satunin, 1903 [imprint 1902]).
The first available mitochondrial data suggested that the Tibetan-hamster lineage is unrelated to all other Cricetulus members4, 5. Subsequently, this conclusion has been corroborated by phylogenetic reconstructions using a set of five nuclear exons and two mitochondrial genes2. Furthermore, molecular evidence has indicated that Urocricetus is phylogenetically related to dwarf hamsters of the genus Phodopus (Miller, 1910)2, 6. It was suggested that both Phodopus and Urocricetus originated in East Central Asia (east of the Altai–Tian Shan boundary) having separated from each other in the early Late Miocene (~ 10.4 Mya), which is comparable to the time point of the split between chromosomally, morphologically, and genetically divergent Mesocricetus and Cricetus lineages. Accordingly, it has been postulated that Urocricetus definitely deserves the rank of a separate genus2.
Species structure of this genus is unclear. At different times, one to four species of Tibetan hamsters were believed to exit by different authors (e.g., ref.1, 7; for more details see ref.3). Nonetheless, in most checklists, only U. kamensis and U. alticola (Thomas, 1917) have been regarded as valid species (e.g., ref.8), as Cricetulus members. Recent nuclear and mitochondrial data are consistent with the view that U. kamensis and U. alticola are distinct, albeit closely related species2; however, this treatment is opposed by Ding and Liao3, who advocate the monotypy of the genus.
Available molecular data on Urocricetus are limited to sequences of mitochondrial DNA and several exons of nuclear genes. There is absolutely no information on karyotypic organization of genomes of its representatives. In this work, for the first time, we give a complete description of U. kamensis karyotype structure. To precisely determine the phylogenetic position of Urocricetus, we undertook a sequence analysis of fragments of 25 nuclear genes.
The diploid chromosome number in karyotypes of the male and female was found to be 2n = 30, NFa = 50 (Fig. 1). The autosomal set consists of five pairs of metacentrics (No. 1, 2, 4, 11, and 13), six pairs of submetacentrics (No. 5, 7, 8, 10, and 12), and three pairs of acrocentrics (No. 3, 6, and 9); pair No. 14 turned out to be heteromorphic and is composed of a small meta- and submetacentric. The X chromosome is represented by a medium-size acrocentric. The Y chromosome proved to be the smallest acrocentric in the male karyotype (Fig. 1).
The female karyotype of U. kamensis, 2n = 30, NFa = 50. (a) Localization of M. auratus probes (black lines) and the rDNA probe (triangles) on G-banded chromosomes. Centromere positions are marked by black points. (b) C-banding. Male sex chromosomes and pair No. 14 are presented in the grey frames.
C-banding revealed heterochromatic blocks in pericentromeric regions of all autosomes and X chromosomes (Fig. 1b). The submetacentric homolog of pair No. 14 carries a clearly visible C-positive block in the distal part of the q-arm. The X chromosome contains slightly visible interstitial C-blocks. The Y chromosome was found to be completely C-positive.
CMA3-positive interstitial blocks were seen in chromosomes 2 and X (Fig. 2a). Chromosomes 3 and 6 carry large bright CMA3-positive blocks. The smaller homolog of pair No. 14 has a distal CMA3-positive region, whereas the bigger one contains a 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-positive block in the q-arm (Fig. 2a). The hybridization indicated that the smaller homolog carries a cluster of rDNA (Fig. 2b). Two clusters of rDNA were also detected in the p-arm and a distal part of the q-arm of chromosome 6. A telomeric probe did not detect any interstitial localization (Fig. 2b).
(a) CDAG-banding of U. kamensis chromosomes; the blue arrow points to a block of AT-rich heterochromatin on one of the homologs of the pair of chromosomes 14, and the green arrow indicates a block of GC-rich heterochromatin on the other homolog of this pair. (b) Localization of telomeric (green) and rDNA (red) probes on U. kamensis chromosomes; red arrows mark rDNA clusters. G-banded metaphases are shown on the left.
The set of chromosome-specific probes of the golden hamster contains several mixed probes17. Microdissection was performed to produce individual probes of those chromosomes that hit mixed peaks during flow-sorting. Probes of the following chromosomes of M. auratus or their regions were constructed: 6q distal, 6q proximal, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 18 distal.
Most probes of M. auratus (MAUR), when localized on chromosomes of U. kamensis(UKAM), yielded an obvious signal (Fig. 3). No unambiguous signal was detectable on the pair of chromosomes 14 of U. kamensis. To determine the region of homology, microdissection of chromosomes 13 and 14 of U. kamensis from the same metaphase plate was carried out. Four probes (U1–U4) were obtained. The localization of the resultant probes on chromosomes of the original species and golden hamster was performed next (Fig. 3a,b). It was established that probes U1 and U3 are homologous to chromosome UKAM13 and that U2 and U4 are homologous to chromosome UKAM14 (Fig. 3a). It was demonstrated that the pair of chromosomes 14 of U. kamensis shares a homology region with the interstitial region of the q-arm of chromosome 4 of M. auratus. A part of chromosome 13 of U. kamensis is homologous to the interstitial region of the q-arm of chromosome 3 of M. auratus (Figs. 3b). Overall, 38 autosomal conserved segments were uncovered in the U. kamensis karyotype owing to the observed localization of the set of chromosome-specific probes of M. auratus (Fig. 1a).
Examples of FISH data. Localization of U. kamensis microdissection-derived probes: (a), U1 (green) and U2 (red) on chromosomes of U. kamensis; (b) U3 (green) and U4 (red) on chromosomes of M. auratus. Localization of M. auratus chromosome–specific probes on chromosomes of U. kamensis: (c) 14 (green) and 16 (red); (d) 9 (green) and 16 (red); (e) 4 (green) and 10 (red); (f) 3 (green) and 11 (red); (g) 9 (green) and 5 (red); and (h), 18 (green) and 7 (red). (i) Localization of microdissection-derived probes of M. auratus 16 (red) and M11 (green) on chromosomes of P. roborovskii. G-banded metaphases are presented on the left.
The new microdissection-derived probes of M. auratus and their subsequent localization on chromosomes of two Phodopus species (P. roborovskii and P. sungorus) allowed us to correct the previously published chromosome map for the genus29. It was revealed that earlier, in a comparison of banding patterns, the correspondence of the regions homologous to chromosomes MAUR11-14, and 16 was determined incorrectly. We demonstrated that PROB5p is homologous to MAUR16/14 instead of MAUR15, PROB10 is homologous to MAUR6/14 but not MAUR6/11, and PROB16 is homologous to MAUR14 rather than MAUR11 (Fig. 4). Besides, an additional tiny fragment of MAUR5 was uncovered in the distal part of the p-arm of chromosome PROB7. All the detected changes are also characteristic of homologous regions of P. sungorus chromosomes (PSUN) and, we believe, P. campbelli chromosomes. Microdissection-derived probe UKAM13 hybridized with PSUN5p, PSUN10, PROB11, and PROB15. Probe UKAM14 hybridized with interstitial parts of PSUN1q and PROB4 (data not shown).
The male karyotype of P. roborovskii with corrected localization of M. auratus probes (black lines) on G-banded chromosomes. Centromere positions are marked by black points. Black arrows indicate the regions in which the localization of probes changed relative to those published previously29.
The PartititonFinder routine subdivided the alignment of 25 nuclear genes into ten and five subsets for the edge-linked proportional and edge-unlinked models, respectively. The partitioning schemes and optimal substitution models are listed in Supplementary Information. The Bayesian information criterion score was lower for the edge-linked model (76,247.2 versus 76,812.4), consequently indicating a lack of pronounced variation in branch length proportions among the subsets.
Both the ML tree and Bayesian tree (Fig. 5) contained Phodopus + Urocricetus and Cricetulus + Mesocricetus clades. This branching pattern is robustly supported by fast bootstrapping, Bayesian posterior probabilities, and P values from the aBayes and SH-aLRT tests. The AU test indicated that the 99.9% credible set contains a single tree.
ML phylogeny of Cricetinae as deduced from concatenated alignment of 25 nuclear genes. Clade support is shown at the nodes [top numbers: ML fast bootstrap via edge-linked model (%)/ML fast bootstrap via edge-unlinked model (%); bottom numbers: SH-aLRT support (%)/aBayes support]. Representatives of subfamilies Arvicolinae, Sigmodontinae, and Neotominae serve as outgroups.
The gene trees for the 25 markers had various topologies with only 10 genes reproducing the same branching pattern as that in the concatenated tree. The Phodopus + Urocricetus clade was present in 17 gene trees. Nevertheless, according to the AU tests, none of the gene-specific topologies was significantly better than that of the concatenated tree at P < 0.05. Therefore, all variations among the examined genes can be attributed to insufficient information content in certain alignments rather than to a significant conflict among loci.
According to the node age reconstruction in BEAST (Figure S1), the crown age of Cricetinae dates back to the Middle/Late Miocene boundary (11.2–12.0 Mya). The inferred time of divergence between Phodopus and Urocricetus (9.2–10.1 Mya) supports an early Late Miocene origin of these lineages.
The obtained two Cytb sequences were identical and were found to share the highest similarity with GenBank sequences having accession numbers MK047375, MK047376, and MH142301, differing from them only by seven substitutions. All these sequences belong to clade A as determined in ref.3, which we believe to correspond to true U. kamensis occurring in eastern Tibet and Nanshan.
Urocricetus is one of the few genera of small mammals endemic to Tibet3. Numerous studies show that Tibetan fauna species have undoubtedly gone through habitat fragmentation and population fluctuations during glacial cold phases [see reviews in refs.3, 30]. It can be assumed that unstable environmental and climatic conditions along with the presence of high-altitude terrains acting as barriers have contributed to rapid chromosomal and molecular evolution.
Karyotype variation within Urocricetus remains unstudied. The only previously published piece of information on the chromosome number is the indication that U. alticola is characterized by 2n = 22 as reported previously1. Nonetheless, the latter publication contains no reference to the original cytogenetic study, and therefore this report needs verification. Here we revealed that U. kamensis has 2n = 30, which is higher than 2n in hamsters of the Cricetulus group, where 2n = 20–24 is characteristic for all studied species.
The results of comparative chromosome painting convincingly showed that the U. kamensis karyotype is very different from that of the rest of cricetine hamsters in terms of the number of detected syntenic blocks and the type of identified M. auratus chromosome associations (Fig. 1a). The 38 autosomal conserved segments revealed in the U. kamensis karyotype is not only greater than this number in representatives of genera Cricetulus and Phodopus but also greater than that in all representatives of the subfamily17, 29.
In the U. kamensis karyotype, we detected some chromosome associations previously identified in karyotypes of other Cricetinae. MAUR17/19 is characteristic for all cricetine hamsters except Mesocricetus29. On the other hand, in karyotypes of Cricetulus and Allocricetulus, researchers have registered a full fragment of chromosome MAUR1917, 29, 31, 32, whereas in the U. kamensis karyotype, the association is formed by a part of MAUR19 (Fig. 1a). Chromosome MAUR19 is represented by three fragments in the genome of this species. Fission of this chromosome is also characteristic of Phodopus and Tscherskia, where MAUR19 was detected in two fragments [Fig. 4 and Ref.29].
In karyotypes of all hamsters except Mesocricetus, association MAUR3/13 containing a complete fragment of chromosome 3 has been reported17, 29, 31, 32. By contrast, in U. kamensis and Phodopus karyotypes, the association includes only one of the three fragments of chromosome 3 identified in the genome of the species under study (Fig. 1a)29. A similar situation was observed here with the MAUR3/11 association found in karyotypes of absolutely all cricetine hamsters. It is important to note that in the karyotype of U. kamensis, the association manifested itself as MAUR11/3/11, whereas in the P. roborovskii karyotype it looks like MAUR3/11/3 (Figs. 1a and 4). The question whether these associations have a common evolutionary origin remains open.
Association MAUR4/10, represented by complete fragments of chromosomes 4 and 10, has been identified in the Allocricetulus curtatus karyotype31. Of note, it is present in two more cricetine species. In Phodopus karyotypes, it contains only a fragment of chromosome 1029, but in the karyotype of U. kamensis, it features a fragment of chromosome 4 (Figs. 1a and 3e).
All representatives of Cricetulus and Allocricetulus have association MAUR5/9/14/16/15 in their karyotypes17, 29, 31, 32. Some components of this association have been documented in karyotypes of other hamsters, e.g., association MAUR5/9/14 in Phodopus29. Nevertheless, it has been shown that this association contains other parts of M. auratus chromosomes. It is likely that associations MAUR5/9, 9/14/16/9, and 15/16 found in the U. kamensis karyotype have independent evolutionary origins. Updating previously published data29 allowed us to determine precisely that in the karyotypes of U. kamensis and Phodopus species, MAUR14 is represented by three parts, whereas the number of MAUR16 fragments differs. Thus, in U. kamensis, we identified two fragments homologous to MAUR16, and both Phodopus species possess three (Figs. 1a and 4).
The discovery of an additional fragment of MAUR5 in Phodopus species led to the identification of a new association in their karyotypes (MAUR5/20). A similar association is typical for the U. kamensis karyotype, where it was found in the p-arm of chromosome 10 in our study. Previously, association MAUR5q/20 has also been registered in the karyotype of Tscherskia triton29, however, it is still unknown whether these associations contain identical fragments of chromosome MAUR5.
Our FISH data show that although some associations are shared by Urocricetus with other hamsters, and could, in fact, belong to the karyotype of their common ancestor, there is no unambiguous chromosomal synapomorphy supporting an association of Urocricetus with any other cricetine lineage.
Molecular data convincingly support the hypothesis that Urocricetus is a member of a highly divergent lineage that is a sister group to Phodopus thereby corroborating previous results based on a less representative sampling (five nuclear genes2). According to our molecular-clock analysis, the four major lineages of Cricetinae (Phodopus, Urocricetus, Mesocricetus, and Cricetus:Tscherskia: Cricetulus clade) diverged in quick succession in the earliest Late Miocene, which apparently matches transition to a colder and more arid climate (middle Miocene transition33). Relatively short time intervals corresponding to basal internodes in the cricetine tree (1.3–2.0 My) may account for the lack of chromosomal synapomorphies for the Phodopus + Urocricetus clade.
Considering the intrageneric relationships, it should be emphasized that—contrary to the interpretation by Ding and Liao3 who regard Urocricetus as monotypic—the available genetic data (both nuclear and mitochondrial) are consistent with recognition of two species within the genus based on the genetic species concept34. Thus, mitochondrial phylogeographic data support the existence of two major clades that can be assigned to traditionally accepted U. kamensis and U. alticola. These clades are separated by the Cytb K2P distance of 6.7%, which falls within the divergence range between indisputable sister species of hamsters: i.e., Phodopus sungorus/Ph. campbelli (4.5%35), Mesocricetus auratus/M. raddei (6.0%35), and Cricetulus barabensis sensu lato/C. sokolovi (8.5%36). According to nuclear-gene analysis, the split between U. kamensis and U. alticola dates back to the end of the Early Pleistocene (940 Kya2),which is also suggestive of the species level divergence. Moreover, mitochondrial data from ref.3 reveal significant structuring within the U. alticola mitochondrial clade that consists of three main subclades supposedly corresponding to three subspecies: U. a. alticola, U. a. lama (Bonhote, 1905), and U. a. tibetanus (Thomas, 1922). At present, no morphological, chromosomal, or nuclear multilocus data are available that can elucidate the interrelationships among these taxa.
