Predictive value of brachial artery flow-mediated dilation on coronary artery abnormality in acute stage of Kawasaki disease
Coronary artery abnormalities (CAAs) are a severe complication of Kawasaki disease (KD) that may lead to cardiovascular events. Given the evidence that brachial artery flow-mediated dilation (FMD) decreases in children after the onset of KD, we hypothesized that it could be an early marker of CAA development in the acute stage and investigated its relationship with variation in the coronary artery diameter. A total of 326 sex- and age-matched children were enrolled, including 120 with KD, 109 febrile children and 97 healthy controls. In this study, FMD was significantly decreased in the KD group compared with the febrile and healthy groups. FMD was lower in the CAA group than in the no coronary artery abnormality group. The comparison of FMD showed an obvious difference among the CAA subgroups. The FMD in the coronary aneurysm (CA) group showed a strong negative correlation with the pretreatment maximum coronary artery Z-score (preZmax). While preZmax was 2.5, the receiver operating characteristic curve indicated an optimal cutoff point of 3.44% for FMD. FMD ≤ 3.44% could be considered as a signal of coronary lesions in acute stage of KD.
Kawasaki disease (KD) is a self-limiting systemic vasculitis of small- and medium-sized arteries. With its high incidence of inflammatory dilation and infiltration in the coronary arteries, KD has become the most common cause of childhoodacquired heart disease1. As a noninvasive measurement of endothelial function, brachial artery flow-mediated dilation (FMD) decreases in each phase of KD and remains low for a long time, which suggests sclerosis during the convalescent phase2,3. The Z-score of the coronary artery may reflect the presence of coronary artery abnormalities (CAAs) in KD more objectively than a direct measurement of the diameter4,5. However, the association between endothelial dysfunction and the severity of CAAs in the acute phase of KD remains unclear. This study aimed to determine whether predictable endothelial dysfunction exists even before dilation of the coronary artery by comparing FMD among different groups, as well as whether there is a correlation between FMD and the pretreatment maximum coronary artery Z-score (preZmax), during acute KD.
Ninety-seven healthy subjects completing regular check-ups, 109 febrile children and 120 children with KD were included (Fig. 1). All subjects were randomly selected during the same period at the same hospital mentioned above. Two hundred and ninety six cases participated in the ultrasonic test, while 5 of them quit directly for personal reasons and 5 quit because of medical reasons, both before the test began. Then 286 cases involved in the ultrasonic test progress. The initial failure rate was about 17.8%. In kids who failed at the first try, 15% woke up or cried during the ultrasonic test and the rest 2.8% failed because of an occasional instrument malfunction. As 32.6% of those first-try-failed children could be calm down by comfort, the rest of them need additional dose of sedatives. Kids who could not cooperate to complete the test had to quit, so that the final failure rate was 3.5%. As shown in Table 1, there were no significant differences in baseline characteristics (age, sex, BMI) among the KD, febrile and healthy groups (P > 0.05). Coronary segment distribution of preZmax varied in Fig. 2. There were significant differences in FMD among those groups (F = 86.190, P < 0.01). The FMD in the KD group was significantly lower than that in both the febrile and healthy groups on pairwise comparison (F =  − 6.298, − 7.843, P < 0.01), while no significant difference in the FMD was observed between the febrile and healthy groups (F = 1.546, P = 0.025). The FMD in the CAA group was significantly lower than that in the no coronary artery abnormality (NCAA) group (F = 21.932, P < 0.001), similar to the comparison between the CA and NCA groups (F = 52.819, P < 0.001). Differences in FMD among the CAA subgroups were significant (F = 47.525, P < 0.01) (Fig. 3).There were strong negative correlations between these two ultrasonography features only in groups such as the KD(r =  − 0.732, P < 0.001), CAA(r =  − 0.935, P < 0.001), NCAA(r =  − 0.735, P < 0.001), SCA(r =  − 0.845, P < 0.001) and CA(r =  − 0.952, P < 0.001) groups (Fig. 4). FMD = 3.44% had a sensitivity of 86.1% and specificity of 96.2% in predicting coronary aneurysm formation (area under curve (AUC) = 0.908, 95% confidence interval (95%CI): 0.852–0.965, P < 0.001), while FMD = 6.82% (predicting for coronary dilation (preZmax > 2.0)) only had a sensitivity of 63.5% and specificity of 81.3% (AUC = 0.793, 95%CI: 0.707–0.880, P < 0.001) (Fig. 5).
Participant flow diagram.
Coronary segment distribution of the preZmax in different groups. The number shows the percentage of coronary segment which the preZmax came from.
Comparison and distribution of flow-mediated dilation (FMD) among groups. KD Kawasaki disease; Feb febrile (controls); Hea healthy (controls); CAA coronary artery abnormality; NCAA no coronary artery abnormality; CA coronary aneurysm; NCA no coronary aneurysm; MD mild dilation; SCA small coronary aneurysm; MCA middle coronary aneurysm; LCA large coronary aneurysm. Box plots showing (a) comparison of FMD among the KD, febrile and healthy groups; (b) comparison of FMD between the CAA and NCAA groups; (c) comparison of FMD between the CA and NCA groups; (d) distribution of FMD among the subgroups of CAA group. (*P < 0.01; **P > 0.05). Circles denote outlier cases, and squares denote extreme cases.
Correlation between flow-mediated dilation (FMD) and pretreatment maximum coronary artery Z-score (preZmax) in groups. KD Kawasaki disease; Feb febrile (controls); Hea healthy (controls); CA coronary aneurysm; NCA no coronary aneurysm; CAA coronary artery abnormality; NCAA no coronary artery abnormality; MD mild dilation; SCA small coronary aneurysm; MCA middle coronary aneurysm; LCA large coronary aneurysm. Scatter plots showing (a) correlation between FMD and preZmax in the KD, febrile and healthy groups; (b) correlation between FMD and preZmax in the CA and NCA groups; (c) correlation between FMD and preZmax in the CAA and NCAA groups; (d) correlation between FMD and preZmax in the CAA subgroups.
(a) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis for flow-mediated dilation (FMD) in predicting coronary dilation (preZmax > 2.0) during acute Kawasaki disease. (b) ROC curve analysis for FMD in predicting coronary aneurysm (preZmax ≥ 2.5) during acute Kawasaki disease. AUC* area under the curve.
FMD is regarded as a reliable ultrasound parameter, which relevantly reflects coronary endothelial function5,10. Endothelial dysfunction occurs when FMD is less than 5% as a result of complicated interactions of multitudinous cytokines, molecules, microparticles, etc., which also influence KD-associated vasculitis throughout all phases11,12,13. In this study, we found no significant difference in FMD or preZmax between the febrile and healthy groups, which means common infection-related febrile factors maybe not sufficient to cause neither serious damage to the vascular endothelium nor obvious dilation of the vascular muscularis. On the other hand, the FMD in the KD group was significantly lower than that in both of the other groups, proving that endothelial dysfunction appeared during the acute stage in the majority of KD patients, including those who did not show coronary arterial dilation14,15 as a further step based on those studies that considered the corresponding endothelial cells to be damaged to some extent when the coronary artery was dilated by remodelling of the blood vessel wall in the acute phase11,16,17,18. In addition, the FMD in the CAA group in the acute stage was significantly decreased compared with that in the NCAA group, the same between the CA group and the NCA group. FMD significant differences among the mild dilation (MD), SCA, middle coronary aneurysm (MCA) and large coronary aneurysm (LCA) groups. In addition, FMD decreased with increasing coronary artery dilation, suggesting that there may be a correlation between coronary endothelial dysfunction and the degree of coronary artery dilation.
Previous studies have not illustrated how much FMD decreases if there is a clear possibility of coronary artery dilation. To evaluate the dilation more objectively, our study applied preZmax instead of the coronary artery diameter in the analysis of FMD4,5. In the following correlation analysis, a strong negative correlation was observed between FMD and preZmax in the KD group, which meant that there might be an increased possibility of abnormal coronary dilation with a decrease in FMD due to the appearance of endothelial dysfunction. In the subgroup comparison, FMD showed a strong negative relationship with preZmax in the CA, CAA and SCA groups, and the absolute value of the correlation coefficient was larger in the CA group than any of the KD, CAA, NA and NCA groups. However, such a relationship was not detected in the MD, MCA or LCA group. Therefore, it is worth mentioning that MD might not be sufficient to impact FMD, which is altered obviously only in the presence of coronary aneurysms. Several studies have shown that the pathological mechanism of mild coronary dilatation in acute phase of Kawasaki disease is different from that of coronary aneurysm, while the former comes before the latter. In the mild dilation stage, the media of affected vessels demonstrate edematous dissociation of the smooth muscle cells, which is most obvious toward the exterior. Endothelial cell swelling and subendothelial edema are seen, but the internal elastic lamina remains intact, so that the inner diameter of the coronary arteries could return to normal in a short time, which maybe a reason for the transient dilation. Destruction of the internal elastic lamina and eventually fibroblastic proliferation occur at the aneurysm stage, after an inflammatory cascade produces endothelial dysfunction and damage to the vascular wall6,19,20,21,22,23,24. According to the pathogenesis and our findings, it might be suggested that kids with worse endothelial dysfunction may have greater chance to get CA in acute phase of KD than those just with mild dilation. However, we couldn't clarify quiet clearly the relationship between Z-score (or inner diameter of coronary artery ) and FMD( or vascular endothelial function) as well as the variation trend of inner diameter further for KD children who already had coronary aneurysms in acute stage, since the number of cases of MCAs and LCAs might be too small to detect a significant difference. The underlying mechanisms of this coronary diameter-related injury in endothelial inflammation require further exploration15.
Furthermore, although the relationship in all other CAA subgroups was weaker than that in the NCAA group, the strongest negative relationship among the CAA subgroups was observed in the CA group, meaning that the degree of coronary dilation became sensitive to endothelial dysfunction upon SCA formation or when preZmax ranged from 2.5 to bigger. The above results suggest that simple linearity may be inadequate to explain the relationship between endothelial dysfunction and coronary abnormalities, especially for those with middle and large coronary aneurysms. Further studies with a larger number of MCA and LCA cases on compensatory mechanisms, time course, etc., are needed to determine the exact mathematical relationship between these two indicators. Nevertheless, we still need to emphasize that the dynamic inflammation in endothelial dysfunction may starts mostly at the beginning of SCA development during the progression of KD. From this period on, some irreversible imbalance could have gradually formed in the endothelial immune system25,26,27, which may aggravate coronary expansion15,28,29.
In the further determination of the optimal threshold for predicting CAA, we found that FMD ≤ 3.44% had good sensitivity and specificity for SCA and more severe types. It is advantageous to pay attention to the moment of SCA formation or FMD ≤ 3.44% and increase the frequency of monitoring the inner diameter of the coronary artery to provide supportive treatment for vascular endothelial immune reconstruction and regeneration30,31,32,33, since these measures may have a positive effect on the recovery of damaged coronary endothelial function and the prevention of the further development of an MCA, an LCA or coronary constriction caused by inflammation going deep into the muscularis and coronary vessel wall remodelling34. The above speculation may also be supposed as a reference for the administration time in both basic and clinical research on medicines for early KD treatment.
In conclusion, FMD could sensitively indicate the pathological process of acute coronary artery dilation, especially for aneurysms when it is less than 3.44%, by demonstrating arterial endothelial dysfunction at the beginning of KD.
The following limitations to our study should be considered. First, this was a single-centre study that lasted for only two years. Second, we only focused on the acute phase of KD, and the results could be more convincing if the subacute phase, convalescence and even adulthood were all considered. Third, there were only a few cases of MCA and LCA. Selection bias and ascertainment bias could not be ruled out. Further longitudinal studies with a larger number of special cases, with a longer follow-up time and including various phases are recommended.
