Chloroplast genomes in Populus (Salicaceae): comparisons from an intensively sampled genus reveal dynamic patterns of evolution
The chloroplast is one of two organelles containing a separate genome that codes for essential and distinct cellular functions such as photosynthesis. Given the importance of chloroplasts in plant metabolism, the genomic architecture and gene content have been strongly conserved through long periods of time and as such are useful molecular tools for evolutionary inferences. At present, complete chloroplast genomes from over 4000 species have been deposited into publicly accessible databases. Despite the large number of complete chloroplast genomes, comprehensive analyses regarding genome architecture and gene content have not been conducted for many lineages with complete species sampling. In this study, we employed the genus Populus to assess how more comprehensively sampled chloroplast genome analyses can be used in understanding chloroplast evolution in a broadly studied lineage of angiosperms. We conducted comparative analyses across Populus in order to elucidate variation in key genome features such as genome size, gene number, gene content, repeat type and number, SSR (Simple Sequence Repeat) abundance, and boundary positioning between the four main units of the genome. We found that some genome annotations were variable across the genus owing in part from errors in assembly or data checking and from this provided corrected annotations. We also employed complete chloroplast genomes for phylogenetic analyses including the dating of divergence times throughout the genus. Lastly, we utilized re-sequencing data to describe the variations of pan-chloroplast genomes at the population level for P. euphratica. The analyses used in this paper provide a blueprint for the types of analyses that can be conducted with publicly available chloroplast genomes as well as methods for building upon existing datasets to improve evolutionary inference.
The use of complete chloroplast genomes in studies of plant biodiversity has provided an important advancement over previous methods because of the conserved gene content, mainly uniparental inheritance, and very low rates of recombination helping to reduce problems such as incomplete lineage sorting found among nuclear markers1, 2. As with the nucleus and mitochondria, the chloroplast controls essential and specialized cellular functions, mainly photosynthesis, with coding genes retained in this genome distinct to this cellular compartment3. The origin of organelle genomes traces back to the incorporation of endosymbiotic cyanobacteria (chloroplast) and alpha-proteobacteria (mitochondria) into proto-eukaryotic host cells about one billion years ago4,5,6. From the time of initial incorporation, organelle genomes have been continually re-shaped during evolutionary history resulting in the current diversity of organelle genomes found throughout eukaryotic lineages today6, 7. During this complicated co-evolutionary process, many functional genes or DNA fragments in organelle genomes have been transferred to the host nuclear genome or lost entirely8, 9. The outcome of so many gene transfers from organelles to the nucleus is ongoing molecular crosstalk between the different cellular compartments in the form of coordinated cellular signaling and gene expression10,11,12,13. Despite the coordination of molecular processes between the different genomes, the chloroplast is most often uniparentally inherited during sexual reproduction. As such the finely tuned coordination between the separate genomes can conflict after interspecific hybridization if previously established gene networks are disrupted by the presence of more divergent chloroplast and mitochondrial transcripts interacting with nuclear genes14, 15. Such conflicts, if severe enough, can limit the survival of interspecific hybrids providing a means by which species boundaries are maintained in areas of sympatry. Furthermore, changes in ploidy that occur in some cases of interspecific hybridization can also affect genomic interactions through maternally biased gene conversion and paternal homeolog pseudogenization16. The size and complexity of chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes are small and streamlined compared with nuclear genomes17. Because of this, chloroplast genome sequencing and assembly is relatively straight-forward compared to nuclear genomes. This is evident when comparing the over 5000 complete chloroplast genomes versus the ~ 500 complete nuclear genomes available in the NCBI database (5647 chloroplast/plastid and 538 nuclear genomes as of 15 March 2021). While smaller in size than nuclear genomes, plant mitochondrial genomes are often more complicated than chloroplast genomes owing in part to the multichromosomal structuring and large segments of repetitive DNA resulting in just over 200 complete plant mitochondrial genomes available in the NCBI database18. Typically, the chloroplast genome maintains a conserved and quadripartite circular structure across nearly all land plants with sizes ranging from 115 to 165 Kb, and a conserved gene content and gene order17, 19, 20. Based on these highly conserved characteristics of plant chloroplast genomes and the development of high-throughput sequencing technologies more species have been sequenced and uploaded to public databases but with varying degrees of annotation quality, and sampling density (Fig. 1). The numerous publicly available chloroplast genomes have provided an essential genetic resource for many types of research including applied studies21,22,23,24,25. In traditional molecular systematic and population genetic studies chloroplast markers such as matK, rbcL, atpF-atpH, trnH-psbA, and psbK-psbI have been recognized as among the best loci for barcoding and tree of life reconstructions24, 26,27,28. Now, that entire genomes can be easily sequenced and assembled, the field of chloroplast phylogenomics has grown in importance25, 29,30,31. In addition, the chloroplast may prove to be the genome of choice for genetic transformation as it occurs in high copy number within the cell, is uniparentally inherited, and is largely non-recombinant21, 32. As such well curated chloroplast genome sequence databases with a high density of species and population sampling will be needed for accurate design of transformation constructs. 
The distribution of finished chloroplast genome at different taxonomic levels. Panels a–d, represent the number of finished chloroplast genome at group, order, family and genus levels, respectively.
In this study, we examine the use of chloroplast genomes for inferring phylogenomic relationships, dating inferred divergence times, and identifying the different types of structural changes that have evolved through time using the economically and ecologically important genus Populus as a model. Given the importance of Populus species, P. trichocarpa (black cottonwood) was the first tree species for which the nuclear genome was fully sequenced33. Since then, seven additional Populus species have been sequenced and finished (https://plabipd.de/plant_genomes_pa.ep). Populus is also an important model genus for studying the evolution of dioecy in plants as two different genetic systems of sexual determination have been identified34, 35 (XY and ZW systems). Over 30 species are currently recognized in the genus Populus with many of the species growing across massive geographic ranges36, 37. At present, over 40 available chloroplast genomes have been sequenced, representing most named species (including several hybrid species) from Populus. However, in regard to taxonomy it should be noted that 98 species level designations/names are currently accepted for Populus species of which 26 are used to denote hybrid taxa and an additional 466 species names are either synonymized or unresolved (http://www.theplantlist.org/tpl1.1/search?q=populus). Furthermore, 18 additional names are accepted at the infraspecific rank within 13 Populus species. Such taxonomic conflict underlies the problem classic systematists have had using morphology alone in properly characterizing a genus with wide-ranging morphological characters37, rampant hybridization36, 38, 39 and extremely long-lived individuals overlapping with recent generations40, 41—all potentially obscuring signals of divergence. As such genetic markers that provide robust signals of divergence are needed to accurately reconstruct the history of cladogenesis in Populus. The genus Populus is an ideal study system for examining the utility of chloroplast genomes in inferring evolutionary history and patterns in trees with near comprehensive species sampling as well as population level sampling in some species. We will explore the following questions: 1) How is chloroplast genome structure conserved across the genus? 2) What types of mutational changes have accumulated during cladogenesis and are these lineage specific? and 3) What other evolutionary patterns can be observed from comprehensive chloroplast data sets?
Before the development of modern sequencing technologies, researchers often employed one or several genetic markers to investigate pertinent biological questions24, 28, and chloroplast markers were among the main genetic resources in those days. To date, over 4000 complete chloroplast genomes (by the date of 03/15/2021, there are 5647 chloroplast/plastid of non-redundant species) have been deposited in the NCBI database18 (Fig. 1, table S1). To illustrate the phylogenetic distribution of the finished chloroplast genomes, we will focus this part mainly on the land plants and separate them into different groups in Fig. 1.
The angiosperms are the most specious group of land plants with well over 300,000 species42 and with the greatest number of completed chloroplast genome sequences. However, because the angiosperms are so diverse the 4235 completed chloroplast genomes of non-redundant species (data collected on 02/24/2020 from NCBI database, including 4210 chloroplast/plastid accessions starting with “NC_” from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/browse#!/organelles/, and 25 other accessions, Table S1) account for only about 1.3 percent of the total number of species, whereas the ~ 100 complete chloroplast genomes from the gymnosperm accounts for about 15 percent of the total species (Fig. 1). This trend is also true for completed plant mitochondrial genomes. However, the number of finished plant mitochondrial genomes are just over 20018. While angiosperms are the most diverse group of land plants and are important for providing much of humanities needs for survival, groups such as ferns (105 complete chloroplast genomes accounting for 1% of all fern species), lycophytes (32; 2.5%), bryophytes (39; 0.2%), and even algae should have more chloroplast genomes sequenced in order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of chloroplast evolution.
At the order level (Table S1), the top orders for number of completed chloroplast genomes are from Poales (598; 3.2%), Asterales (341; 1.3%), Lamiales (269; 1.1%), Asparagales (259; 0.7%), Rosales (204; 2.5%), Malpighiales (176; 1.1%), Solanales (172; 4.1%), Ericales (170; 1.4%), Fabales (166; 0.6%), Ranunculales (142; 3.1%), and Pinales (139; 60.2%). At the family level, the top families for number of completed chloroplast genomes are Poaceae (586; 5.2%), Asteraceae (212; 0.8%), Orchidaceae (172; 0.7%), Fabaceae (166; 0.8%), Rosaceae (156; 5.6%), Solanaceae (136; 5.5%), Campanulaceae (119; 5.0%), Oleaceae (94; 15.3%), Brassicaceae (90; 2.3%), and Ranunculaceae (84; 3.3%). At the genus level, the top ten most sequenced genera for chloroplast genomes are Solanum (86; 6.1%), Lobelia (54; 13.0%), Vitis (43; 57.3%), Dendrobium (42; 2.5%), Populus (39; ~ 100.0%), Piofontia (36; 57.1%), Gossypium (34: 68.0%), Pinus (33; 29.2%), Eucalyptus (32; 4.0%), and Passiflora (30; 4.8%). From these numbers, it is clear that sampling effort has been unevenly distributed among different plant groups/genera. The target species or families for chloroplast sequencing have been those with high economic values (e.g. crop and ornamental species). However, this sampling approach does not result in even sampling based on phylogenetic distance that would result in more useful data for overall inferences on chloroplast evolution. Genera such as Vitis and Populus are approaching comprehensive levels of sampling and provide excellent study systems for understanding chloroplast evolution in greater resolution.
One of the main reasons behind the rapid increase of finished chloroplast genomes is due to the recent development of sequencing technologies, such as next generation sequencing (NGS), third generation sequencing (TGS), and the decrease in cost associated with these sequencing methods. Before the development of NGS, the traditional Sanger sequencing method was the dominant process for sequencing chloroplast genomes17. Between 1986 and 2015, only 400 complete chloroplast genomes had been published using Sanger sequencing17, from 2015 to now the number increased by nearly ten times18. As such the rate of chloroplast genome sequencing in the past 5 years has increased nine times over the previous twenty 20 years (~ 3600 genomes from 2015–2020/ ~ 400 genomes from 1986 to 2015 = 9 times). In addition to the improvements in sequencing technology, bioinformatic methods for annotation and assembly have also improved making post sequencing processing more efficient and accurate43. In addition to speed and accuracy of NGS sequencing the huge reductions in cost have also contributed to the increase of completed chloroplast genomes. With the massive increase in publicly available chloroplast genome sequences, questions regarding data quality, sampling density, and appropriate analytical methods for inferring evolution with large, differentially sampled datasets, become increasingly important. As such we employed chloroplast genomes from the genus Populus to assess issues of data quality and analytical methods in a lineage of plants that have been nearly comprehensively sampled for all species and in at least one instance have population level sampling.
For the 39 sequenced Populus chloroplast genomes, the full-length variation is approximately 3.5 Kb (155,096–158,591 bp). This level of variability in length is similar for the inferred age of Populus (~ 48 mya)44 when compared to other clades with extensive chloroplast genome sequencing like Solanaceae (~ 55 mya)45, but differ greatly in regard to the number of species (Solanum =  ~ 2400 vs Populus =  ~ 90). As such length variability of chloroplast genomes may be more constrained by time than the number of speciation events in a clade, as is expected for a genome that is essentially nonrecombinant and highly constrained in function. However, differences in genome content between genera should be compared to see if regions of variability are generalizable between distantly related lineage.
In regard to the publicly available chloroplast genomes in Populus, seven species were found to possess between 1 and 40 N bases in their published genomes. These errors likely arose from sequencing or assembly errors in repetitive regions such as poly A/T regions. The 40 N bases in P. yunnanensis (NC_037421; isolate MaoKS-CX-2014-270) were located in the intergenic region of psaA-ycf3. None of the other 38 chloroplast genomes contained errors at this site suggesting that the P. yunnanensis sequence was not properly checked for deletions or polymorphisms but could be easily updated with resequencing. Such discrepancies point to the need for these genomes containing Ns to be re-sequenced (possibly with updated TGS methods) and/or reassembled to improve inferences made with this data. Using incomplete genomes can reduce the accuracy of inferring relationships among species17.
In addition to problems with nucleotide calls in the Populus chloroplast genomes, several gene annotations were inconsistent regarding number and content of genes. In general, because gene content is so consistently conserved in chloroplast genomes29, it is rare to see gene duplications or deletions at the genus or even family level30, 46. As such we reannotated all 39 chloroplast genomes in Populus by incorporating all gene content to improve the continuity of annotations across the genus (Supplement Table S2). The following issue were found with annotations: P. pruinosa (NC_037417) lacked annotations for both copies (in each inverted repeat region) of rps7, P. ilicifolia (NC_031371) and P. davidiana x P. alba (NC_044462) had only a single rps7 copy annotated, similarly P. balsamifera (NC_024735), had only one copy of both ndhB and ycf2 where two should be annotated (one in each IR), and lastly the previous annotation of ycf1 in P. pruinosa (NC_037417) and P. szechuanica (NC_037419) were removed. Given the above results, researchers should practice caution both when using NCBI data and when uploading completed chloroplast genomes. It should also be noted that annotations are improved when sampling density within a lineage is increased and thus periodic lineage-based reannotations should be conducted for groups like Populus that have comprehensive sampling.
Chloroplast genomes have become an indispensable tool in resolving plant phylogenetic relationships given the relative ease in generating complete high-quality sequences and the lack of recombination46, 47. By employing all coding genes and the full length of the chloroplast genomes from 39 Populus species and two out group species from Salix, the phylogenetic tree for Populus using maximum likelihood48 (Fig. 2) was analyzed.
Phylogenic tree of 39 Populus species based on an alignment of 76 chloroplast coding genes using the ML method. Two Salix species were used as out-groups. The number above each node indicates the BS support value for that clade.
Five sub-clades were resolved in the analyses each with high support values (referred to with roman numerals I-V; Fig. 2). Membership of each clade is nearly identical to the results in Zong et al.37 save the samples added herein and differences with internal branching order. The species P. szechuanica and P. trinervis resolved in different clades and may reflect mislabeling or misidentification of species in GenBank. For instance, as we employed P. szechuanica NC_037419 and Zong et al.37 employed P. szechuanica MK267303 suggesting one of these samples might be mislabeled or if biological in origin could reflect differences in parentage in past hybridization events. Branching order above the level of the recognized subclades also differed between our analysis and Zong et al.37.
When comparing the cp tree to the tree using nuclear derived SNVs (single nucleotide variants) in Wang et al.36 the topology and membership of well supported clades differs. For example, P. fremontii, P. deltoides, and P. nigra of the section Aigeiros were in a late diverging clade with species from sections Aigieros, Tacamahaca, and Leucoides in the nuclear tree whereas in the cp tree P. fremontii, and P. deltoides are in an early diverging clade (clade V) and P. nigra resolved in a late diverging clade (clade I) with species from the section Populus/Leuce. Consensus among the nuclear SNV data the cp tree of Zong et al.37 and the cp genome analyses conducted here is found in the section Turanga containing all the same species in the same branching order. The phylogenetic trees from either of the two genomes (cp or nuclear) also demonstrated that polyphyly and paraphyly are common among the classic delimitations of most sections of Populus. For instance, species of section Aigeiros were found in clades I, II, and V of our analyses and were polyphyletic in a late diverging clade in Wang et al.36. These results reflect what is already well known for Populus that hybrid speciation and incomplete lineage sorting resolve conflicting topologies when genomes from different cellular components are used in phylogenetic analyses37, 49. For this current study, we focused on comparisons between the five well supported cp clades of Populus (Fig. 2) as a basis for understanding chloroplast evolution and compare this to nuclear phylogenies and taxonomic designations where applicable.
Repeat content is important for chloroplast genomic comparisons as they can vary between different lineages and lead to differences in genome size and structural rearrangements46, 50. To compare the number and content of small repeats (mostly ranging from 20 to100 bp) in chloroplast genomes of Populus, we systematically analyzed the variation across the 39 species and within the five clades to see if any patterns were present between lineages. The repeats were identified using REPuter (https://bibiserv.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de/reputer) and classified by motif type to include direct forward (F), reverse (R), complement (C), and palindromic matchs (P) (Fig. 3). The greatest number of repeats were from the smallest size class (20–29 bp; 77.1%, 1504 out of 1950) in Populus. The number of repeats from the longer size classes (> 30 bp) were five or less per species for any given motif. The trend of a greater abundance of short repeats follows that for other chloroplast genomes and is the inverse of plant mitochondrial genomes wherein longer repeats are more abundant6.
Variation of repeat abundance and type within chloroplasts from 39 Populus species and two outgroups.
The least common repeat type across all size classes were complement (C) repeats with no more than five found in any given species. The palindromic repeats (P) were the most abundant type (36.3%, 546 out of 1504) in the 20–29 bp group with forward (F) and reverse (R) repeats the second most abundant (30.9% and 27.0% respectively). Variation between and within clades is clearly apparent especially among the larger repeat size classes. For instance, clade III has the lowest number of palindromic repeats (P) in the 20–29 bp, but the only reverse (R) repeats in 40–49 bp size class. In the 30–39 bp group the reverse (R) repeats are absent in clade IV, while in clade III and clade V the complement (C) repeats were absent. Within clades repat abundance varied such as in clade IV, were P. wilsonii (NC_037223) which had the lowest number of repeats in 20–29 bp group (23) while in the same clade, P. xiangchengensis (NC_040953) and P. gonggaensis (NC_040873) both had 24 more (47 total). However, in 30–39 bp group, P. xiangchengensis (NC_040953) and P. gonggaensis (NC_040873) had zero repeats, and P. wilsonii (NC_037223) had highest number in this size class (7). In 40–49 bp size class, repeat numbers were low and fairly consistent across clades. In 50 + bp group, P. wilsonii (NC_037223) had highest number of repeats of all 39 species sampled. From comparisons of repeat number across clades and species it appears that repeat number and type vary suggesting that there may have been differences in transposition activity and/or mutations (making the repeats undetectable) at both the species and clade levels.
Because of high mutation rates simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are important loci in population genetic, phylogenetic and biogeographic studies51. To better characterize the distribution of SSRs in the Populus genus, we conducted several analyses to detect and compare SSRs. The most common SSR type detected were homopolymer A/T repeats accounting for 95.2% on average of all SSRs in Populus (Fig. 4a). The high abundance of this type of SSR is in line with most other chloroplast genomes studied thus far46. By contrast only one or two polycytosine (poly C)/polyguanine (poly G) SSRs (Fig. 4b) were detected per genome. The length variation of poly A/T SSRs was from 10 to 31 bp, with the number of poly A/T SSRs varying from 96 to 118 across the Populus chloroplast genomes. The two outgroup species from Salix contained far fewer poly A/T SSRs than all other Populus species when applying the 10 bp cut-off for homopolymer SSR detection. As poly A repeats in cpDNA can be associated with modulating transcription the differences between Salix and Populus A/T repeat abundance may reflect differences in transcriptional modulation between the two lineages52. However, more in-depth analyses from Salix should be conducted to address this question.
The number of Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) in Populus chloroplast genomes and two out-group species. a: A/T SSRs; b: other common SSR motifs.
The abundance of the most common SSR repeat motifs are summarized in Fig. 4b. The dinucleotide repeat ATx was the most abundant dinucleotide SSR, with numbers varying from 1 to 6 per chloroplast genome. Clade III and clade V had the most dinucleotide repeats with four or more in all species. In clade IV, some species had one and others had four. The most common trinucleotide repeats AATx varied from zero to three per genome with clades IV, V, and the outgroup with numerous species that did not contain this repeat. The tetranucleotide AATTx SSR was only found in P. wilsonii and the hexanucleotide AGATATx was only found in P. balsamifera.
By employing the mVISTA tool, we analyzed the global sequence diversity in Populus using one representative species from each of the five clades (Fig. 5). From this, it is clear that the five sampled Populus chloroplast genomes exhibited high sequence similarity with some notable exceptions such as the non-coding region between psbC_1 and psbZ_1 in P. wilsonii. High levels of sequence similarity across chloroplast genomes at this phylogenetic depth is common among land plants30, 46. At the genome level, the large single copy region (from the start position to rpl22) had the most variable positions and the two inverted repeat regions (rpl22 to ndhF and ycf1 to the rpl22) had the fewest variable positions.
Global alignment of four Populus chloroplast genomes from different clades using mVISTA with Salix interior as reference. Y-axis shows the range of sequence identity (50–100%). tRNA and rRNA genes were not present in this figure. Numbers 1 and 2 after gene names indicate duplicate copies.
In order to further characterize sequence variation across all Populus species, we conducted sequence variation comparisons on a data set partitioned into coding and non-coding sets. Sequence variation was assessed using the T-Coffee score53 to report the variation in the alignment of all species (Figure S1). From this analysis most parts of the alignment scored above 950 suggesting high levels of similarity across all genomes. Using a score of 925 as a cut-off, 15 sites were identified as highly variable. Region atpA-atpF contained the lowest score at 750 with the second lowest score (870) in ndhD − psaC from the small single copy. All 15 highly variable sites were located in non-coding sequences of the genome. One of the 15 highly variable sites was from the inverted repeat region (rps19-rpl2), two sites were from the small single copy region (ccsA-ndhD, ndhD-psaC), and the remaining 12 sites were in the large single copy region.
To detect proteins undergoing selection in any of the 76 chloroplast protein coding genes, we calculated the dN (nonsynonymous substitution rates), dS (synonymous substitution rates) and the ratio of dN/dS (quantifying the strength of selection) (Fig. 6) while employing the above phylogenetic tree (Fig. 2) as a basis of comparison. The 75 genes (psaI omitted) were divided into five groups based on function and included photosynthesis genes (44), ribosomal proteins (19), transcription/translation genes (4), conserved ORF genes (4), and miscellaneous proteins (4). The dN average values and variability around the average across all five gene categories was very low throughout Populus with outliers in the photosynthesis and ribosomal protein gene groups respectively. The dS values were somewhat higher than the dN values but relatively low with little variability save the outliers in the photosynthesis gene group (Fig. 6). The dN/dS values indicate that nearly all genes are undergoing strong purifying selection which is expected for genes under strong functional constraints like those found in most photosynthetic plants. However, genes psbJ and rpl2 were outliers with high dN/dS values suggesting that those (photosynthetic and ribosomal protein genes respectively) genes are undergoing positive selection. The other two genes petL and rps8 (also photosynthetic and ribosomal proteins) were the other outliers in dN/dS values. Aside from those outliers the photosynthetic genes had the lowest dN/dS values indicating the function of these genes are highly constrained.
The mode and strength of selection of 75 chloroplast protein coding genes in Populus.
Like nearly all land plants the chloroplast genomes of Populus are divided into four parts17, the large single copy region (LSC) and the small single copy region (SSC), separated by two inverted repeat regions (IRA and IRB, Fig. 7). Differences in the boundary of these four parts are measured by the distance (in nucleotides) of adjacent genes to the junctions and can, in some cases, provide phylogenetic signal in distinguishing lineages54, 55. In Populus, the genes adjacent to the junction boundaries are as follows: LSC-IRB with genes rpl22-rps19; IRB-SSC with genes trnN-ndhF; SSC-IRA straddled by ycf1; and IRA-LSC with genes rps19-trnH. To determine the degree to which differences in junction boundaries are heterogeneous across Populus, we chose eleven species (two from each clade and an outgroup) to compare boundary positioning. The distance of rps19 was consistent across all species at 170 bp from the LSC-IRB boundary. The position of rps19 was essentially constant at 223 or 224 bp from the IRA-LSC junction as was the position of trnN-GUU at either 337 bp or 344 bp from the boundary of SSC-IRA. The most variable junction boundary was that of IRB-SSC with trnN from 2121 to 2153 bp from the junction boundary. As such this junction boundary is the most variable of the four and is similar to other chloroplast genomes in this regard30, 46.
Comparison of junctions between the LSC, SSC, and IR regions among one exemplar species from each clade. Figure is not to scale. (LSC Large single-copy, SSC Small single-copy, IR inverted repeat).
The relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) is a ratio value of the frequency of the target codon to the expected frequency of that codon. If the RSCU is larger than 1, it indicates that the target codon is used more frequently than expected. A value smaller than 1 indicates that the codon is used less frequently than expected56,57,58. Using the RSCU value as a basis of comparison, we selected one species from each of the five clades (Fig. 2) to compare the distribution and frequency of codon usage (Figure S2).
From these comparisons (Figure S2), 64 types of codons encoding 20 amino acids and one stop codon were detected in all five species sampled. The distribution and frequency of those codons was very similar across Populus. Among the reported codons, Ter-UGA (one type of three stop codons but does not code for an amino acid) had the lowest RSCU value in all five species. The Tyr-UAC encoding the tyrosine amino acid had the lowest RSCU value of all 20 amino acids, and the Gly-GGA encoding the glycine amino acid had the highest RSCU value. Methionine was the least frequent amino acid, and glycine (Gly), arginine (Arg) and serine (Ser) were the most frequent amino acids in all species. The most frequent amino acids in Populus differed from the Lagerstroemia species where leucine, arginine and serine were the most abundant59. As such codon usage may be mostly conserved at the genus level but vary when compared to more distant lineages. These analyses also revealed that one-half of the codons were used more frequently than expected with an RSCU value > 1, of which all of them ended with A/U. These codon usage patterns were similar to those reported in other angiosperms, possibly due to the high proportion of A/T nucleotides present in chloroplast genomes60.
Another important application of chloroplast genome data is in estimating clade ages24, 25, 31 especially in genera like Populus where rampant hybridization can obscure signals of more ancient divergence39. Based on a matrix of 76 chloroplast coding genes and the earliest recognizable fossils of ancestral Populus species (~ 48 MYA), we inferred the age of clades in Populus by employing BEAST61 (Fig. 8). From this analysis the median age of each major clade was 9.68 (7.66–11.64 MYA) for clade I, 2.71 (0.86–5.22 MYA) for clade II, 8.07 (2.68–14.23 MYA) for clade III, 11.24 (4.68–18.36 MYA) for clade IV, and 4.61 (1.90–8.22 MYA) for clade V. Ages for each clade varied considerably suggesting possible differences in evolutionary processes such as varying degrees of lineage sorting or adaptive radiation in regard to chloroplasts39.
Ages of selected lineages of Populus inferred from 76 chloroplast genes. The blue dot indicates the earliest known fossils of ancestral Populus species44, and red dots represent calibrations used from the TimeTree website (http://www.timetree.org).
Before the development of NGS technologies, whole chloroplast genome resequencing for SNP discovery and population genomics was effectively impossible due to cost and efficiency constraints. Before whole chloroplast genomics a small number of chloroplast loci (rbcL, matK, trnL-F, etc.) were employed that provided limited resolution at the population level28. Because the chloroplast is non-recombinant and uniparentally inherited it can provide information on population divergence that can be lost in nuclear markers where interspecific introgression and repeated backcrossing can obscure signals of past divergence17, 39. To assess the utility of whole chloroplast genome data for population genomics we reanalyzed the nuclear genome resequencing data set of P. euphratica from Ma et al.62 to include only chloroplast SNPs which were not previous employed in their analyses. Principle coordinate analyses (PCA) and frequency-based population structure analyses were employed to assess divergence among individuals from across the range of P. euphratica. (Fig. 9). From these analyses it is clear that whole chloroplast derived SNPs provide adequate signal to identify divergent lineages of P. euphratica. The results using just the chloroplast SNPs largely reflect the results obtained by Ma et al.62 but provide improved resolution (PCA) given the absence of recombination from recent backcrossing.
The principal component analysis (PCA) plot of chloroplast SNP data for 45 sampled individuals. Color coding reflects different geographic collection sites.
To better understand the distribution of SNPs across the chloroplast genomes of P. euphratica, the number of SNPs in each 500-bp window were calculated (Figure S3). From this analysis it is clear that nucleotide variability at the population level is localized to the two single copy regions, as no SNPs (occurring in more than one individual) were found in the IR regions. High mutation rates in the single copy regions at the population level are also found at the genus level (Fig. 5) suggesting that regions used to delimit species may also have utility for population level analyses. More work is needed to understand how population level polymorphisms differ from species level polymorphisms in chloroplasts and how these polymorphisms (e.g., SNPs versus large insertions/deletions) could be used in population/species coalescent analyses.
In this paper, numerous different analyses using whole chloroplast genomes were conducted to demonstrate the utility and simplicity of this type of molecular data in making inferences regarding systematics and evolution. We chose the genus Populus because it is a model study system with nearly complete sampling of whole chloroplast genomes across all species as well as an example of population level whole chloroplast genome resequencing. Populus was expected to provide a suitable example of what to expect in regard to phylogenetic resolution, dating, and population genetics in other genera once they have been more comprehensively sequenced. Because reticulate evolution appears to be commonplace among numerous lineages of Populus36, the chloroplast genome may be especially relevant in detecting signals of divergence lost to abundant introgression or at least provide a comparative genome for finding and cross-dating divergent islands in the nuclear genome62. As such chloroplast genome data should be applied to other long-lived frequently hybridizing plant lineages to see if similar patterns are common. In addition, differences in clade ages, species richness, and the branch lengths of Populus subclades provide a comparative basis for testing hypothesis on adaptive radiation and the evolution of chloroplast genomes (Fig. 8).
The large-scale structural features of chloroplast genomes were found to be largely conserved across species of Populus. For instance, as has been found in other tree genera such as Pterocarpus46 junction boundaries do not vary by more than 50 bp. As such at the genus level while chloroplast genome size can vary by 3.5 Kb, positioning of the genes adjacent to the junction boundaries are strongly conserved at the genus level but less so at the family level. Furthermore, the length from gene to gene at junction boundaries does not appear to have a phylogenetic signal with the length from trnN-GUU to ndhF 2140 bp in early diverging P. wilsonii (clade IV), 2153 bp in later diverging P euphratica, (clade III), and back to 2140 bp in yet later diverging P. schneideri (clade II). As such junction boundaries in Populus are convergent in respect to total nucleotide length as compared to the phylogeny based on protein coding gene alignments (Fig. 2). This suggests that junction boundary distances may serve to delimit genera but not subclades within genera. In a similar manner the number of poly A/T repeats (and to some degree codon usage) appear to differ with little to no overlap between genera but not within genera. For instance, the number of poly A/T repeats at the 10 bp cutoff in Populus varies between 98 and 118 while in the sister genus Salix the number does not exceed 90. Interestingly intergeneric viable offspring are far less common than interspecific viable offspring in plants which may in part be linked to the pattern of conserved features at the genus level but not above63.
Directional selection on functional genes in chloroplasts is relatively uncommon across very long periods of time indicating that purifying selection maintains functional continuity in chloroplast genes64. However, chloroplast genomic studies are finding that generally a handful of genes within the genome have evolved via positive selection64,65,66. Our findings for Populus also found several genes under positive selection when comparing subclades within the genus. Given these findings more detailed and widespread studies need to be conducted to document and improve our understanding of positive selection in the evolution chloroplast genes. Genus and family level studies that integrate gene expression data and rate evolution of nuclear-chloroplast-interacting genes may clarify why different chloroplast genes have undergone different modes and rates of selection.
While the chloroplast genome is generally viewed as highly conserved and little changed, our and other findings2, suggest that even at the population level the chloroplast genomes contain ample SNPs for resolving population structure. More work is needed to place these population level differences in context through intensively sampled sister-species comparative studies and data partitioning to understand how these changes may lead to functional changes between populations including the evolution of cytonuclear conflict in hybrids67. Comparative studies with Populus might prove especially useful in understanding cytonuclear conflict as strong reproductive barriers between lineages do not appear to exist given extensive evidence of past natural introgression36, 39, 62.
