Reward sensitivity differs depending on global self-esteem in value-based decision-making
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-78635-1
Global self-esteem is a component of individual personality that impacts decision-making. Many studies have discussed the different preferences for decision-making in response to threats to a person’s self-confidence, depending on global self-esteem. However, studies about global self-esteem and non-social decision-making have indicated that decisions differ due to reward sensitivity. Here, reward sensitivity refers to the extent to which rewards change decisions. We hypothesized that individuals with lower global self-esteem have lower reward sensitivity and investigated the relationship between self-esteem and reward sensitivity using a computational model. We first examined the effect of expected value and maximum value in learning under uncertainties because some studies have shown the possibility of saliency (e.g. maximum value) and relative value (e.g. expected value) affecting decisions, respectively. In our learning task, expected value affected decisions, but there was no significant effect of maximum value. Therefore, we modelled participants’ choices under the condition of different expected value without considering maximum value. We used the Q-learning model, which is one of the traditional computational models in explaining experiential learning decisions. Global self-esteem correlated positively with reward sensitivity. Our results suggest that individual reward sensitivity affects decision-making depending on one’s global self-esteem.
Global self-esteem is a component of individual personality that has an impact on decision-making. Global self-esteem is defined as a general attitude of individuals regarding their own worth1. Low global self-esteem affects depression significantly2, and is related to risky behavior3; that is, global self-esteem is an influential predictor of mental and physical health.
Decision-making has social and non-social aspects. Many studies about the impact of global self-esteem on decision-making have focused on social aspects based on sociometer theory4. Individuals with a high global self-esteem tended to evaluate themselves more favorably than their partners’ rating5,6. On the other hand, individuals with lower global self-esteem believed that they received less positive feedback from peers indicating that they were liked or disliked7. Moreover, people with lower global self-esteem/higher anxiety showed greater self-other differences; namely, they preferred more risk-averse choices for personal decisions than that for others’ decisions8,9. In short, people with low global self-esteem tend to underestimate their own value, in response to feedback in social situations, compared to people with high global self-esteem.
However, there is also the possibility that individuals with lower global self-esteem underestimate reward and value equally, in both social and non-social situations. The relationship between global self-esteem and Behavioral Activation System (BAS) is notable. BAS is a model of appetitive motivation causing movement towards goals or rewards, assessed by the BAS scale10 which has 13 items (e.g., “When I see an opportunity for something I like, I get excited right away”). Some studies show that global self-esteem is positively related to BAS in self-report questionnaires11,12. These studies indicate that individuals with different global self-esteem have different responses to rewards. If people with lower self-esteem underestimate a received reward, a behavioral change by the reward has to be low even in actual decisions. The extent to which reward changes decisions was defined as reward sensitivity in our study. To our knowledge, there is no study to measure the relationship between global self-esteem and reward sensitivity behaviorally. In order to better understand the impact of global self-esteem on decision-making, it is necessary to investigate whether global self-esteem and reward sensitivity are correlated in terms of actual decision behaviors.
In general, computational models have been used to investigate decision-making13,14. One of the traditional computational models is the Q-learning model15, which has focuses on expected value and is quite successful in predicting choice behavior. In the learning paradigm, expected value and salience value might contribute to decision biases. Humans can learn about different payoffs through experience16,17. In addition, salience value affects decision biases and preference reversal under certain conditions18. Therefore, we should discuss global self-esteem and reward sensitivity by considering the impact of expected value and salience value. We adopted the maximum value as the salience value because maximum value, or large variance, was used for saliency in a previous study18.
In our study, we first examined the effects of expected value and salience value on learning under uncertainties, and then investigated the relationship between global self-esteem and reward sensitivity under the condition in which learning was affected, by using the Q-learning model15.
There was no significant difference in decisions between C1 and C2 (p \(=\) 0.061) (Fig. 2a). On the other hand, C2 and C3 had significantly different continuous distributions of decisions (p < 0.001) (Fig. 2b). Therefore, in this learning paradigm, only expected value affected decisions between different uncertainties. These results were verified by the resampling analysis (C1 vs. C2: \(a>\) 0.1, C2 vs. C3: \(a<\) 0.001).
Decisions of each condition. Empirical cumulative distribution functions for ratios of choices of more ambiguous stimuli. The vertical axis represents the proportion of participants. (a) Decisions of C1 and C2. (b) Decisions of C2 and C3.
The mean RSES score was 31.59 (SD = 8.70) and there was no significant gender difference (t = 0.37, p = 0.71). Although we assumed that the maximum values could affect value-based decision-making, only expected values affected decisions in our learning paradigm. Therefore, we modelled participants’ decisions under C3 that had different expected values without considering maximum value. Participants selected stimulus which had higher expected values significantly (\(\hbox {t}=15.68\), \(\hbox {p}<0.001\)). The mean reward sensitivity was 0.00247 (SD = 0.00129). RSES score and reward sensitivity were significantly positively correlated (r \(=\) 0.35, p \(=\) 0.035) (Fig. 3). These results were verified by the resampling analysis (\(a<\) 0.05).
Reward sensitivity and RSES score (r \(=\) 0.35, p \(=\) 0.035).
We used a value-based decision-making task with controlled expected value and maximum value in order to investigate the relationship between global self-esteem and reward sensitivity. In this experiment, only expected value affected decisions. Therefore, we modelled decisions under the condition with different expected values using Q-learning model and calculated the correlation between global self-esteem and reward sensitivity. Based on the results, global self-esteem and reward sensitivity were significantly positively correlated.
Our results showed that only expected value affected value-based decision-making in our learning paradigm. It is rational to make decisions based on expected value. In fact, many studies have shown that people could choose a significantly higher expected reward than the chance level17,24. Contrarily, some studies showed that human decision-making was not fully explained only by expected value. The main reason why our results did not show the effect of maximum value might be that our experiment involved a learning paradigm. Uncertainty due to missing probability information is often called ambiguity. Tsetsos et al.18 showed the impact of saliency by letting participants choose one sequence after simultaneously viewing two or three rapidly varying sequences of numerical values. This is a one-shot decision-making. Moreover, Frisch and Baron25 insisted that ambiguity did not threaten the normative status of utility theory. Therefore, saliency might not affect repeated choices in the condition that has the same expected value and different maximum value. Similarly, saliency did not have the relationship with global self-esteem in our task (see Supplementary Information S1 for detailed explanation).
The most notable result was that RSES score correlated positively with reward sensitivity. This result supported the possibility suggested by previous studies about global self-esteem and self-report questionnaires11,12,26, that is, the different preferences for decisions depending on global self-esteem due to how to receive presented reward. Our finding indicated new possibilities in understanding of the role of reward sensitivity in decision-making related to global self-esteem. On the other hand, many studies showed that global self-esteem biased feedback in social contexts. Individuals with low global self-esteem believed that they received less positive feedback7, and those with high global self-esteem estimated themselves to be more favourable than their partners’ rating5,6. In addition, global self-esteem reflects an accumulation of past appraisals from others27,28, and fluctuations in self-esteem depended on prediction errors between expected and received social feedback29. The further research considering these insights and our results together may lead better understanding the role of self-esteem for decision-making.
There were several limitations in the present study. First, there may be other possible models to explain reward sensitivity. For example, the impact of global self-esteem on decisions under a risk was different between the gain frame and loss frame9. In general, reward sensitivity and risk sensitivity were different when people learned outcomes of their actions through trial and error30. In addition, some studies have claimed that learning rate and reward sensitivity should be separated31. Although this model is unsuitable for our behavioral task (See Supplementary Information S1 for detailed explanation), it is true that there are other possible formulations to explain the relationship between global self-esteem and decision-making. In our study, we clarified the difference in reward sensitivity with the simplest way, that is, the extent to which reward changes decisions in the gain frame, so more detailed behavior-based research of reward sensitivity is necessary. Second, while our experiment involved numerical feedback, global self-esteem is also closely related to social feedback from others for example, low global self-esteem enhances social pain32.
Although there were several limitations, our results are important to understand the impact of global self-esteem on value-based decision-making. To the best of our knowledge, because there has been no research to model the relationship between global self-esteem and reward sensitivity using a computational model, prior to this. In particular, our results suggested that inter-individual difference in global self-esteem might contribute to reward sensitivity.
