Using proximity extension proteomics assay to identify biomarkers associated with infarct size and ejection fraction after ST-elevation myocardial infarction
Plasma concentrations of many cardiovascular and inflammatory proteins are altered after ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and may provide prognostic information. We conducted a large-scale proteomic analysis in patients with STEMI, correlating protein levels to infarct size and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) determined with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. We analysed 131 cardiovascular and inflammatory proteins using a multiplex proximity extension assay and blood samples obtained at baseline, 6, 24, and 96 h from the randomised clinical trial CHILL-MI. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging data at 4 ± 2 days and 6 months were available as per trial protocol. Using a linear regression model with bootstrap resampling and false discovery rate adjustment we identified five proteins (ST2, interleukin-6, pentraxin-3, interleukin-10, renin, and myoglobin) with elevated values corresponding to larger infarct size or worse LVEF and four proteins (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, TNF-related activation induced cytokine, interleukin-16, and cystatin B) with values inversely related to LVEF and infarct size, concluding that among 131 circulating inflammatory and cardiovascular proteins in the acute and sub-acute phase of STEMI, nine showed a relationship with infarct size and LVEF post-STEMI, with IL-6 and ST2 exhibiting the strongest association.
Myocardial infarction is a consequence of atherosclerosis, and chronic inflammation has long been thought to contribute to the progression and instability of atherosclerotic plaques. However, causality was not proven until recently with the Canakinumab Anti-inflammatory Thrombosis Outcome Study (CANTOS)1. In the CANTOS trial, canakinumab, an interleukin-β1 inhibitor, resulted in lower rates of nonfatal MI, stroke, and cardiovascular death without lowering lipid levels. Although methotrexate did not impact clinical outcome in the Cardiovascular inflammation reduction trial (CIRT), the recently-published results of the Colchicine Cardiovascular Outcome Trial (COLCOT) and Colchicine in Patients with Chronic Coronary Disease Trial (LoDoCo2) further support this concept2,3,4. However, the influence of inflammation in myocardial infarction extends beyond chronic inflammation, as acute inflammatory processes are believed to play a role in reperfusion injury and tissue repair in the infarcted myocardium. This is suggested by observational and experimental studies showing elevation of a number of inflammatory and cardiovascular proteins in the acute phase of MI5, correlating with infarct size, particularly in the setting of reperfusion6,7,8. Current understanding is that a balance between inflammation and its resolution, the result of fine-tuned interplay between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory proteins, is central to adequate tissue healing and salvage of compromised myocardium9. Excessive inflammation is thought to contribute to tissue remodelling, fibrosis, and scarring of the heart10, whereas a lack of inflammation may result in inadequate tissue healing11,12.
Biomarker studies provide an important route to understanding myocardial injury, which is vital to development of innovative therapies. However, few studies have assessed the relative importance of proteins by assessing a large number of circuating proteins simultaneously13,14,15.
The objective of this study was to perform a large-scale proteomic analysis using a novel proximity extension assay (PEA) to evaluate the hypothesis that plasma concentrations of 157 inflammation- and cardiovascular-associated proteins correlate to infarct size and ejection fraction in the acute and chronic phase post-STEMI as assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR).
Patient characteristics and CMR results are presented in Table 1. The mean age on admission was 57.5 ± 10.0 years, and 82% were male. The culprit artery was the right coronary artery (RCA) in 47.1% and left anterior descending artery (LAD) in 42% of patients. A total of 91.6% had TIMI flow grade 3 after PCI.
Several proteins were associated with the study outcomes. ST2, myoglobin (MB), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and pentraxin-3 (PTX3) were significantly positively correlated with infarct size at 4 ± 2 days in both univariable and multivariable analyses adjusted for age, sex, and body mass index as well as treatment arm (Fig. 1). Only ST2 and IL-6 were significantly related to both infarct size at 4 ± 2 days and infarct size at 6 months. A negative correlation of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and a positive association of IL-10 with infarct size at 6 months was observed. Univariable and multivariable analyses at 4 ± 2 days and 6 months revealed an inverse relationship of IL-6 with ejection fraction (Fig. 1). TNF-related activation-induced cytokine [TRANCE, also known as receptor activator of the nuclear κ B ligand (RANKL)] showed a positive relationship with ejection fraction in univariable and multivariable analyses at 4 ± 2 days but not at 6 months (Fig. 1). Renin was negatively associated with ejection fraction at 6 months but not at 4 ± 2 days.
Proteins and primary endpoints. Results of univariable and multivariable regression models for infarct size and ejection fraction at 4 ± 2 days and 6 months. Proteins above the red line remained statistically significant after adjusting for multiple testing.
Two proteins, ST2 and MB were negatively associated with myocardial salvage index (Fig. 2). Borderline significance was observed for cancer antingen-125 where high values correlated with lower myocardial salvage index. After adjusting for multiple testing, no protein was significantly associated with ∆ EF, ∆ left ventricular mass, or microvascular obstruction, but interleukin-16 (IL-16) was positively correlated with stroke volume in univariable and multivariable analyses, and cystatin B (CSTB) was associated with improved stroke volume in the univariable model (Fig. 2).
Proteins and secondary endpoints. Results of univariable and multivariable regression models for remaining CMR endpoints. Proteins above the red line remained statistically significant after adjusting for multiple testing.
Time-concentration curves of proteins significantly associated with primary and secondary endpoints are shown in Fig. 3. Proteins that were significantly related to outcome measures after FDR adjustment showed an early release profile followed by either a steady increase or decrease. Proteins associated with larger infarcts and lower ejection fraction increased in concentration shortly after PCI, while, in contrast, proteins associated with a favourable outcome decreased in concentration in the hours after MI, with the exception of IL-10.
Time–concentration curve showing the release profiles for proteins that were statistically significantly related to endpoints after adjustment for multiple testing.
We identified five proteins (ST2, IL-6, PTX3, IL-10, renin, and MB) showing a positive relationship with infarct size or negative with ejection fraction and four (TRAIL, TRANCE, IL-16, and CSTB) with elevated values corresponding to higher ejection fraction, smaller infarct, or improved stroke volume. The proteins with most evident associations were IL-6 and ST2.
Our study confirms previous experimental results, links findings to the clinical setting as well as adding to knowledge of the relative importance of these proteins, not possible with single marker studies. Among studied proteins, ST2 and IL–6 were unique in their correlation with early and final infarct size in both univariable and multivariable analyses. IL–6 was also the only protein to show a link with both early and final ejection fraction, emphasizing its role and importance in the post-infarcted myocardium. IL-6 is a pleiotropic interleukin with both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects, involved in T-cell activation and induction of a pro-inflammatory cascade. In STEMI settings, IL-6 has been shown to predict short- and long-term mortality as well as progression to heart failure18,19,20, and our study also confirms previous reports of IL–6 correlation with infarct size and ejection fraction7. Besides IL-6, Renin was the only other protein with levels negatively related to long-term ejection fraction after STEMI (Fig. 1). Whereas the inhibition of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone pathway is an established therapy in heart failure, the role of IL-6 has not been fully elucidated. Recent research has shown elevated levels of IL-6 in 56% of patients with heart failure and an association with poorer clinical outcome in this setting21. It has been suggested that IL-6 induces overexpression of angiotensin 2 type 1 receptors in vascular smooth muscle, resulting in oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction; possibly linking these findings22. Direct inhibition of renin in experimental models protects against isoproterenol-induced MI, reperfusion injury and the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system have also been reported involved in fibroblast scarring and activation of infarct myofibroblasts9.
ST2, well-studied in cardiovascular settings, showed a strong correlation with infarct size and was the only protein negatively associated with myocardial salvage index. ST2 is a member of the IL-1 receptor family and exists in a transmembrane isoform and in a soluble isoform. IL-33 is the functional ligand of the ST2 transmembrane isoform, and the IL-33/ST2 signalling pathway results in an immune response through nuclear factor kappa B signalling23. In experimental studies, knockout of the IL-33 gene has resulted in increased cardiac remodelling24. Administration of recombinant IL-33, on the other hand, has been shown to reduce infarct size and improve ventricular function, an effect mediated through ST2 signalling, as IL-33 does not improve outcome in ST2-knockout mice25. The soluble form of ST2, measured in this study, antagonizes the binding of IL-33, functioning as a decoy receptor for IL-3326. Elevated levels of soluble ST2 have been observed in patients with poor outcome after MI related to cardiac fibrosis and LV remodelling27,28. An interesting finding is that despite the strong link of ST2 levels to infarct size in our study, we observed no correlation with ejection fraction or ∆ ejection fraction, ∆ LVM, or ∆ stroke volume, surrogate measures of LV remodelling27,28. The chemo-attractant protein IL-16 and cathepsin enzyme inhibitor CSTB were the only proteins found elevated in patients with improved stroke volume. Elevated levels of IL-16 in patients with STEMI have been previously linked to cardiac fibrosis29,30. Considering the pro-inflammatory role of IL-16 as a chemoattractant, this finding is contradictory. However, the complexities of the balance of pro- and anti-inflammation in the acute and subacute phase of STEMI are largely unknown.
PTX, an acute phase reactant, was a factor in early infarct size in both the univariable and multivariable analyses. PTX3, a long pentraxin belonging to the same family of proteins as C-reactive protein, is believed to be an important regulator of inflammation and cardio-protection31. In humans, high levels of PTX3 have been observed after MI32, and, in experimental studies, PTX3-deficient mice show larger infarcts and greater no-flow area33. Proteins with less well established connections to outcome after STEMI were also identified, including TRAIL and TRANCE. TRAIL was negatively correlated to infarct size at 6 months; a finding in line with previous studies showing low levels of TRAIL in patients with poorer outcome post-MI34. Finally, we observed levels of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine with the ability to inhibit release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages, to be elevated in patients with larger infarcts. Previously, high levels of IL-10 have been found in heart failure after acute myocardial infarction35,36.
The findings presented in this study highlight the difficulty of interpreting results of single protein studies in patients with STEMI due to the large amount of proteins that are altered and because of their pleiotropic effects. Whether these proteins are markers of myocardial damage, mediators of processes occurring in the infarcted myocardium or both is yet to be established. Many proteins inversely related to outcome in clinical studies are, nonetheless, associated with smaller infarcts, improved ejection fraction, and reduced LV remodelling in loss-of-function models33,37,38. However, our results indicate that, among hundreds of circulating proteins not routinely assayed in clinical setting of MI, IL-6 and ST2 appear to potentially carry valuable prognostic information. Ongoing randomized trials of tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting IL-6 receptors may add further insight39.
This study has a number of limitations. We studied the levels of a large number of proteins relative to several endpoints. This confers a risk of type I error that was controlled for by adjusting for false discovery rate. The OLINK assay is highly sensitive but was unable to detect a number of important proteins. The data are presented as relative units, rendering it difficult to compare results to other studies. Our younger study population with relatively few comorbidities and first-time STEMI, excluding patients with cardiogenic shock at presentation, may not have been entirely representative of the general STEMI population, but provided fewer comorbidity-confounded protein values. Analyses of ejection fraction at 6 months, ∆ left ventricular mass, ∆ ejection fraction, and ∆ stroke volume might have been confounded by discharge medications such as ACE-inhibitors, as they improve ejection fraction as well as reduce remodelling. However, a study without these medications cannot be performed. We have previously shown minor differences in peak levels of some of the assessed proteins in patients treated with hypothermia as compared to a group receiving standard care, possibly due to only modest cooling40. Regardless of the limited effect of hypothermia, we chose to adjust for this treatment arm, possibly influencing results for some proteins.
Among 131 circulating inflammatory and cardiovascular proteins in the acute and sub-acute phase of STEMI, IL-6 and ST2 were the most clearly associated with infarct size and ejection fraction as evaluated by CMR in the acute and long-term phase after STEMI. Our study confirms previous experimental findings and provides a link to the clinical setting as well as adding to current knowledge of the importance of these proteins.
