Utility of modified vascular corrosion casting technique in the diagnosis of fetal ductus arteriosus abnormalities
The anatomy of ductus arteriosus (DA) can be varied in different congenital heart defects (CHDs), and it is difficult to fully discover the DA and other associated cardiac anomalies by prenatal ultrasound. This study was aimed to use the modified vascular corrosion casting technique to prepare fetal cardiovascular casts with DA anomalies, assess the casting effectiveness in evaluating the great vessels of the fetal heart and investigate the utility of cardiovascular casting for the demonstration of fetal DA abnormalities. This retrospective study enrolled fourteen fetuses (23 to 28+2 gestational weeks) with severe CHDs diagnosed by prenatal echocardiography and casting technique from January 2013 to July 2019. The sonographic features of DAs were carefully observed and other associated cardiovascular anomalies were also evaluated during the screening. The architectures of DAs and the whole cardiovascular system were observed and analyzed, and then the cast findings were compared with prenatal ultrasonic results. In fourteen cases, 18 ductal abnormities were indicated by prenatal echocardiography in fourteen cases, while 25 were revealed by casting. Cast findings included 4 cases of ductal stenosis, 1 case of ductal dilation, 6 cases of ductal circuity, 3 cases of right-sided ductus, 5 cases of anomalous ductal connection, 1 case of bilateral ductus and 5 cases of absent ductus. Cast findings consisted with ultrasound in 10 ductal abnormalities, revealed additional 15 ductal abnormalities miss-diagnosed by sonography, and corrected 6 abnormalities misdiagnosed prenatally. Meanwhile, 3 ductal abnormalities (reversed flow) could not be demonstrated by casts but only by ultrasound. Cast models can visually display the anatomical characteristics of ductus arteriosus, and could be successfully used in the demonstration of ductus abnormalities in fetuses with severe CHDs. Comparing with ultrasound, casting technique has its own superiority in exhibiting ductus abnormalities, especially in certain types such as course, origin and absence abnormalities of ductus.
Nowadays, fetal cardiac screening has been paid more and more attention1. As an important physiological channel for fetal circulation, ductus arteriosus, a normal structure connecting pulmonary trunk (PT) with descending aorta (DAo), is playing an indispensable role in fetal cardiovascular system2,3. Fetal congenital heart defects (CHDs) are often accompanied by ductal abnormalities. In these cases, the connection, course and dimension of the arterial duct can be varied2,3,4. Sometimes it is difficult to fully discover the ductal and other associated cardiac anomalies by prenatal ultrasound. Vascular corrosion casting technique is capable of accurately exhibiting the three-dimensional (3D) architecture of cardiovascular system. Our modified cast models can visually display the origin, course, dimension and relative spatial position of the great vessels, and may become an important supplement to prenatal echocardiography5,6. This study was aimed to introduce the modified method of preparation of fetal cardiovascular casts and assess casting effectiveness in evaluating the great vessels of the fetal heart, Meanwhile, utility of modified cardiovascular casting for the demonstration of fetal ductal abnormalities.


In fourteen cases, the diameters of the great vessels were measured by casting and compared with that measured by fetal echocardiography. The results showed that there were no significant differences in the diameter of the major blood vessels between casting groups and fetal echocardiography groups (Table 1). 18 ductal abnormities were detected in prenatal echocardiography, while 25 found in cardiovascular casts (Table 2, 3). Cast findings were consistent with ultrasound in 10 ductal abnormalities. However, cast models revealed additional 15 ductal abnormalities which were missed in sonography, and corrected 6 abnormalities which were misdiagnosed prenatally. Meanwhile, 3 ductal abnormalities could not be demonstrated by casts but only by ultrasound (Table 3).
DA abnormalities included the following different types: (1) Ductal dimensional abnormality (including ductal stenosis and ductal dilation): five cases of ductal dimensional abnormality were found by casting, including 4 cases of ductal stenosis and 1 case of ductal dilation. One case of ductal stenosis was demonstrated both by ultrasound and cast, 2 cases with narrowed DA indicated by ultrasound were not confirmed by casts, while additional 3 cases revealed slim ductus in casts. One case demonstrated dilated ductus in cast, and another case of ductal dilation suspected by echocardiography was found to be bilateral ductus by cast. (2) Ductal course abnormality (including tortuous ductus and right-sided ductus): six cases of ductal circuity were exhibited in casts, in which only 2 cases were indicated by ultrasound. Three cases of right-sided ductus arteriosus were found by echocardiography, one of them diagnosis both in ultrasound and cast (Fig. 1), one of them was corrected as absent DA by cast. And another case exhibiting right-sided ductus in cast was not detected by ultrasound. (3) Ductal origin abnormality (including anomalous ductal connection and bilateral ductus): three cases of anomalous ductal connection were detected both by ultrasound and casts (Fig. 2), and 2 additional cases were found in casts. Cast confirmed a case of bilateral ductus, which was missed in prenatal ultrasound (Fig. 3). (4) Ductal absence abnormality (absent ductus arteriosus): two cases prenatally suspected with absent ductus were confirmed by cast models, and another three cases with ultrasonic misdiagnosis or missed diagnosis were detected in casts. It is unusual that cast model revealed ductus connecting between left pulmonary artery and descending aorta in case 14, and corrected the suspicion of absent ductal by ultrasound. (5) Ductal flow abnormality (reversed flow in arterial duct): three cases showed reversed blood flow in ductus by color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI), which were not able to revealed by casts apparently.
Prenatal echocardiographic and cast demonstration of a fetus with right-sided ductus arteriosus (Case 13, Table 2). (a) A tortuous right-sided ductus was detected by ultrasound, which connecting right pulmonary with descending aorta. (b), (c) Cast specimen also showed a tortuous ductus (arrow) connecting to descending aorta (right anterior 45° view). DA, ductus arteriosus; AO, aorta; DAO: descending aorta; LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; RAA, right atrial appendage; LAA, left atrial appendage; SVC, superior vena cava.
Prenatal echocardiographic and cast demonstration of a fetus with anomalous ductus arteriosus connection (Case 4, Table 2). (a), (b) Ultrasound showed ductus was connected between left pulmonary artery (LPA) and left subclavian artery (LSA). (c), (d) Cast specimen confirmed the abnormal connection of ductus (arrow), which connecting LPA and LSA. DA, ductus arteriosus; AO, aorta; ARCH, aortic arch; DAO: descending aorta; LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; LSA, eft subclavian artery; RSA, right subclavian artery; LCCA, left common carotid artery; RCCA, right common carotid artery; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; LAA, left atrial appendage; RAA, right atrial appendage.
Prenatal echocardiographic and cast demonstration (Case 14, Table 2). (a), (b)Ductus was not detected by ultrasound. (c), (d) Cast specimen demonstrated the abnormal connection of ductus (arrow), which connecting LPA and DAO. DA, ductus arteriosus; AO, aorta; ARCH, aortic arch; DAO: descending aorta; LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; LSA, left subclavian artery; RSA, right subclavian artery; LCCA, left common carotid artery; RCCA, right common carotid artery; SV, single ventricle; LAA, left atrial appendage; RAA, right atrial appendage.
Ductus arteriosus is one of the main physiological shunts in fetal circulation, and it normally maintains open before birth. The vast majority of right ventricular output is carried by arterial duct from pulmonary trunk (PT) to descending aorta (DAo), leaving only a small amount of blood flowing to the lungs9. Ductus can help to maintain a stable cardiac output (CO), even in fetuses with severe CHDs2,3. In recent years, several studies showed a variety of fetal CHDs were always associated with different ductal abnormalities4. Moreover, certain types of CHDs could even influence the ductal morphology and hemodynamics2,3,4. In these cases, sonographic features of ductus arteriosus could be diverse, which makes it hard to diagnose accurately in utero. Furthermore, prenatal echocardiography may often be affected by a series of factors, such as fetal position and gestational weeks, amniotic fluid volume, maternal abdominal wall thickness, ultrasonic resolution, etc. Hence, there are still some limitations in prenatal diagnosis of fetal CHDs by using ultrasound10.
In this study, we investigated the utility of vascular corrosion casting technique to assess casting effectiveness in evaluating the major blood vessels of the fetal heart and reveal the real anatomy of ductus arteriosus in different CHDs11. Cardiovascular casting is a method of injecting casting material into the vessels, corroding the soft tissues by strong acid, and leaving the real architectures of cardiovascular system12. This method can display the three-dimensional (3D) morphology of fetal severe CHDs. Its unique advantages will help to improve the understanding of fetal cardiac anatomy and the accuracy of prenatal diagnosis5,6. This study indicated cast models could vividly reveal the origin, course, dimension and spatial relationship of ductus arteriosus and other great vessels.
Our study showed various ductal abnormalities were presented in severe CHDs fetuses. By comparing cast with ultrasound, we found more ductal abnormalities could be detected in cast models (25 vs. 18). Casts were not only helpful to confirm prenatal ultrasound results, but also beneficial to correct the missed diagnosis and misdiagnosis by echocardiography (Figs. 1, 2, 3). While, on the other hand, ultrasound also had its special advantages13. For instance, hemodynamic changes in ductus can only be displayed by color Doppler. As we know, blood in ductus arteriosus flows from the main pulmonary trunk to the descending aorta in normal fetus. However, some CHDs may change the hemodynamics. In our study, case 2, 3, 5 all demonstrated reversed flow across DA (from descending aorta to pulmonary artery), and were all associated with pulmonary atresia or pulmonary stenosis.
By using ultrasound combined with cast models, we found several different types of ductal abnormalities in these fourteen cases, which could be divided into dimension abnormality (DA stenosis and dilation), course abnormality (tortuous DA, right-sided DA), origin abnormality (anomalous DA connection, bilateral DA), absence abnormality (absent DA) and flow abnormality (reversed flow in DA). Eight cases had more than one abnormality. These abnormalities are always associated with complicated CHDs. And some of these abnormalities (such as bilateral ductus arteriosus) are rarely seen. Moreover, the existence or absence of ductus arteriosus may change fetal prognosis and therapeutic strategy. Therefore, accurate prenatal diagnosis of ductus arteriosus abnormalities could help perinatal management. In our study, casting technique has its own superiority in revealing these ductal abnormalities, especially in the demonstration of abnormal course, origin and absence of ductus arteriosus. It will help the sonographers gain more insight into the real anatomy of complicated CHDs. Ductal circuity was found in six cases by casts, while only two cases were detected prenatally. Absent duct was suspected in three cases by ultrasound, while casts finally confirmed five cases with absent DA. Anomalous ductus connection was relatively rare, and we found five cases in cast models, with only three cases noticed by ultrasound. Moreover, as an unusual anomaly, one case of bilateral ductus arteriosus was detected by casting technique, which was missed in utero. In this case, the left-sided ductus was connected between left pulmonary artery (LPA) and left subclavian artery (LSA), while the right-sided ductus connected right pulmonary artery (RPA) and descending aorta (DAo). As we know, ductus arteriosus embryologically originates from the distal part of the left sixth arch, and the right sixth arch degenerates eventually14. So bilateral DAs might be caused by failed degeneration of bilateral sixth aortic arch. Bilateral ductus is always associated with complicated cardiac anomalies in previous literatures15,16. And in this case, we also found this fetus had a series of other cardiac malformations, such as single atrium (SA), hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), double-outlet right ventricle (DORV), aortic stenosis (AS), interrupted aortic arch (IAA)and double superior vena cava (DSVC).

Casting and ultrasound both have their own superiorities. Ultrasound is able to display hemodynamic changes by color Doppler, while casting could not. So, the flow direction changes in ductus arteriosus will certainly be missed on cast specimens. On the other hand, casting can demonstrate the real 3D architecture of cardiovascular system, while ultrasound usually display sonographic anatomy in 2D planes. Some abnormalities, such as anomalous ductal connection and bilateral ductus, the course and origin of ductus arteriosus is hardly to demonstrate in single plane by 2D ultrasound. 3D ultrasound may help to reveal these ductal abnormalities, but in fact, these vessels are always too tiny or too curved to be clearly observed or demonstrated.
