Temporal oscillations in preference strength provide evidence for an open system model of constructed preference
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87659-0
The decision process is often conceptualized as a constructive process in which a decision maker accumulates information to form preferences about the choice options and ultimately make a response. Here we examine how these constructive processes unfold by tracking dynamic changes in preference strength. Across two experiments, we observed that mean preference strength systematically oscillated over time and found that eliciting a choice early in time strongly affected the pattern of preference oscillation later in time. Preferences following choices oscillated between being stronger than those without prior choice and being weaker than those without choice. To account for these phenomena, we develop an open system dynamic model which merges the dynamics of Markov random walk processes with those of quantum walk processes. This model incorporates two sources of uncertainty: epistemic uncertainty about what preference state a decision maker has at a particular point in time; and ontic uncertainty about what decision or judgment will be observed when a person has some preference state. Representing these two sources of uncertainty allows the model to account for the oscillations in preference as well as the effect of choice on preference formation.
Contemporary theories of decision making propose that people form preferences as they accumulate information about the different outcomes they can obtain1. In this way, preferences change over time as value is dynamically constructed from the attributes of the available choice options2,3,4,5,6,7. These accounts also suggest that, although attention may fluctuate between attributes so that preferences change stochastically over time3,8,9, a person’s preference between a pair of choice alternatives should gradually accumulate toward a “favored” option. For example, when making a choice between restaurants a person’s attention might fluctuate between considering quality, cost, and convenience across time, but these evaluations will eventually lead them to favor one of the possible options. In most cases, the average trajectory of preference in a binary choice should thus appear as a gradual and monotonic increase toward one option over the other.
Models of preference based on Markov random walks or diffusion processes generally predict this monotonic average trajectory10, but non-classical accounts based on quantum walks11,12,13,14 are at odds with this account. Instead, quantum walk models make the divergent prediction that preference should oscillate over time, systematically going back and forth between favoring one option and another as preferences evolve. The difference in predictions can be understood by drawing an analogy between preferences moving over a bounded preference scale driven by attribute information and either sand or water moving within a bounded region blown by wind. In the Markov account, wind (new information) pushes sand (a probability distribution) toward one edge (end of the preference scale) where it piles up, reaching a stable equilibrium. In the quantum account, the wind pushes a wave of water (amplitude distribution) toward one edge, but it reverberates back off the edge until the wind blows it forward again, making the wave slosh back and forth over time.
Fundamentally, these diverging predictions arise from differences in how these models represent uncertainty in preferences. Classical dynamic models, as well as heuristic accounts15,16 and many other theories of preferential choice17, suggest that a definite state of preference exists at each moment in time. This implies that at any given point in time, a person holds a concrete valuation for each alternative and that the concrete valuations carve out a definite trajectory as they change over time. Uncertainty about preferences in these models is entirely epistemic, capturing an outside observer’s ignorance about what the decision maker thinks and feels internally at any moment. Conversely, quantum models incorporate ontic uncertainty, which describes a person’s internal uncertainty about different responses (choices, judgments, ratings) that could be realized at a specific moment18,19,20,21,22.
Note that the distinction between epistemic and ontic uncertainty is different than the distinction between epistemic and aleatory uncertainty. Epistemic and aleatory uncertainty refer to a classical system where they can be made arbitrarily small with more precise measurements or a more detailed theoretical description of the actual system20,23. Ontic uncertainty becomes relevant when a quantum system is considered, where we can know exactly the superposition state of the system and yet simultaneously different events still have a nonzero potential to be realized. As a result, ontic uncertainty can be reduced by eliciting a response. By forcing a decision maker to choose between two options, they must “collapse” on preferences consistent with one of the choice options. This resolution of uncertainty via a response has important consequences—it can create sequential effects where responses made in sequence affect one another by altering a decision maker’s cognitive state when a response is elicited12,13,14. Therefore, adding quantum dynamical elements to a model should not only result in oscillations in mean preference, but also diverging preference evolution after a decision maker is forced to choose between options (as opposed to conditions not requiring a initial choice)12.
Naturally, a complete account of how people consider their options entails both types of uncertainty: epistemic uncertainty regarding what an outside observer knows about how individuals will react to the choice options they are offered, and ontic uncertainty within the decision maker about what states of preference they experience while deciding. In this article, we make the case for such a hybrid account of uncertainty during the decision process, connecting well-established and new empirical work on the evolution of preference to a new model that incorporates both epistemic and ontic uncertainty. We refer to this as an open system model24,25. This model incorporates classical Markov random walk properties to describe epistemic uncertainty as well as a non-classical quantum walk properties that describe how a person’s preferences oscillate over time and how decisions reduce ontic uncertainty to affect subsequent responses.
To understand the pattern of average preference trajectories and how it ties into classical or quantum dynamics (or, as we suggest, a hybrid of the two), we conducted two studies. In these experiments, we traced out the preference trajectory that unfolds over time as participants considered a choice between (actual) restaurant gift cards (Experiment 1) or between monetary gambles (Experiment 2) (Fig. 1). The experiments are described in detail in the “Supplementary materials”. Both studies compared preference patterns following a choice between two options against preference patterns in absence of choice. Both studies were incentivized with real payoffs corresponding to the options participants were presented. The result from both experiments was that preference systematically oscillated over time, and that these oscillations depended on whether or not a choice was made prior to the preference rating. Such phenomena place strong constraints on dynamic theories of preference evolution and preferential choice, which we address after presenting the results.
Outline of the structure of experiments 1 and 2.
For both experiments, we analyzed the strength of preference ratings, which was calculated as the absolute value of each rating (distance from the midpoint of the scale). This was done to match the choice and no-choice conditions, as there was generally no objectively better option and we cannot condition ratings on the chosen item in a no-choice condition. For Experiment 1, these strength of preference ratings ranged from 0 to 30 because the scale varied from \(-30\) (strongly favor left) to \(+30\) (strongly favor right). For Experiment 2, they ranged from 0 to 10 because the scale went from \(-10\) (strongly favor left) to \(+10\) (strongly favor right).
To analyze the results of these experiments, we carried out two main analyses on each experiment. The first was a polynomial regression model predicting mean strength of preference ratings as a quintic function of the time point at which they were drawn. There are several reasons for using a 5th order polynomial. Chiefly, it allows us to detect patterns of oscillation that involve at least four inversions (two cycles). A single cycle could be detected with a 3rd order polynomial, and we report this model for completeness (using a 3rd or 4th order polynomial still results in credible/significant effects), but the data appear to include at least two cycles. We are also limited to a quintic polynomial by the amount of data in the first experiment. With only six time points, a quintic polynomial is fully saturated and therefore testing its coefficients should identify any significant/credible effects in the data.
A key prediction of the quantum model is that making an initial choice should induce a change in the patterns of preference oscillation. Our previous work suggests that there should be some mean differences between the two conditions12, but the effect is also predicted to manifest in the amplitude of the oscillations between conditions at longer timescales14. Therefore, we also used the polynomial regression to identify differences between the choice and no-choice conditions comparing the 5th order coefficients between conditions.
A second prediction of the quantum and open system (with a partial quantum component) models that can be evaluated with the polynomial regression is that preference strength should oscillate over time. We fit the fifth order polynomial model to the choice and no-choice conditions separately, meaning that we can evaluate the higher-order (3+) coefficients within each condition to determine if there is credible oscillation, in addition to evaluating the differences between conditions.
The second analysis that we carry out for both experiments is a Gaussian process regression, which allows us to make inferences about functions that map time point onto mean preference strength as opposed to making inferences about the coefficients of a pre-specified function. This analysis is more general and in some ways more complete, as it considers all possible mappings between elicitation time and preference strength (within a set of weak assumptions) and assigns likelihoods to which mappings are most likely. This analysis allows us to construct a 95% highest density interval [HDI] on mean preference, spanning not just our data points but all possible time points that could be observed. By comparing differences in the HDI between choice and no-choice conditions, we can identify any instances where the two conditions diverge based on our data.
To summarize the main results of both experiments, we observed that preferences oscillated back and forth systematically over time. Furthermore, this oscillation depended on whether or not a choice was made prior to the preference rating. Choice apparently stabilized overall preferences so that they were more resistant to subsequent change, resulting in lower-amplitude oscillations in preference strength in the choice relative to no-choice conditions. As a consequence, we observed cases where preference strength was stronger in choice conditions than in no-choice conditions (which we refer to as bolstering effects) and cases where preference strength was weaker in choice conditions than in no-choice conditions (which we refer to as suppression effects).
Experiment 1 featured preference ratings between pairs of restaurant gift cards. These ratings could be elicited at any of six discrete time points: 3, 6, 9, 18, 30, or 45s following the initial responses. The mean preference ratings are shown as dark red (choice) and blue (no-choice) circles on the left side of Fig. 2. There were several notable characteristics of these ratings. First, when viewed across the sampled time points, the preference strength appeared to fluctuate back and forth over the 45-s span of delays in the experiment. Second, in the condition where participants had made a decision between the two options (choice), the ratings appeared to be more stable or show less fluctuations than those in the no-choice condition.
Plot of Gaussian process regression, which estimates the best functions mapping time point (x-axis) onto mean preference strength (y-axis). Filled areas indicate 95% most credible functions/error for choice (red) and no-choice (blue) conditions. Preference strength is on a 0–30 scale for Experiment 1 and 0–10 scale for Experiment 2.
As suggested above, the first analysis we carried out examined the polynomial regression estimates to examine the average preference (intercept) and how it changed over time (1st+ order coefficients), including any oscillations in the data (3rd+ order coefficients) (Table 1). On average, mean preference strength was 17.06 on a 30-point scale in the no-choice condition, and 16.59 in the choice condition (credibly lower: \(M_{diff}\) = 0.47, 95% HDI = [0.06, 0.83]). In both conditions, preference strength oscillated over time, evidenced by nonzero effects in the cubic, quartic, and quintic coefficients of the polynomial regression (last three rows of Table 1). This is true for both the choice condition and for the no-choice condition, indicating that there are credible oscillations within both conditions.
In addition to the difference between the intercepts/mean preference strength in choice and no-choice conditions, there were also differences between these two conditions in the cubic and quintic components of the polynomial regression (standardized coefficients are shown in Table 1). These reflect the observation that the no-choice condition tended to show greater amplitude in its oscillations relative to the choice condition and are consistent with the interference effect reported for confidence in perceptual choice12,13.
As a result of these oscillations, there were both cases where preference in the choice condition was greater than in the no-choice condition (time point \(t = 18\) s—testing for a simple difference of means using a “Bayesian t-test”26, the difference was \(M(C-NC) = 1.70\), 95% HDI = [0.48, 2.94]). There were also instances where preference strength in the no-choice condition was greater than in the choice condition (time point \(t=9\) s, \(M(C-NC) = -1.25\), 95% HDI = \([-2.44, -0.00]\)). Overall, the polynomial regression and direct comparisons at specific time points show that there are meaningful patterns in how preference changed over time, including oscillations within conditions and differences in mean preference and the pattern of oscillation between conditions.
Of course, the polynomial regression assumes a very specific form to the pattern of preference strength and how it should change over time. Although we used all of the degrees of freedom in the model (six coefficients for six time points), the true function relating time to mean preference strength could take a very different form than the a 5th order polynomial. To account for this, our second approach utilized a Gaussian process regression [GPR], which imposes fewer assumptions about the relationship between input (time) and output (mean preference) variables. The GPR analysis treated the measurements at different time points, within each condition, as multivariate normally distributed. In the simplest case, that could mean that outcomes within a condition and time point were all normally distributed, but the GPR also allows for correlations in preference strength across time (i.e., 3 s and 6 s should be more closely correlated than 3 s and 45 s).
The output of the GPR is a distribution over functions that map time points to preference judgments (outcomes). It used a squared exponential kernel and set the standard error of the mean in the GPR (the error in predicted y-values) to be equal to the largest standard error observed at any of the delays in that condition (making it as lenient as possible while still being constrained by the data). The width of the kernel determining the smoothness of the regression was set based on the within-subject covariance in preference strength between different delays. This seemed the most sensible way to fix these parameters, as it was the conservative yet still reflected the variance and covariance of preferences within the data.
The result of the GPR for Experiment 1 is shown in the left panel of Fig. 2. The mean estimated preference strength is shown as a dark red line for the choice condition and dark blue line for the no-choice condition. The shaded regions correspond to the 95% HDI on the functions mapping time to preference strength for the choice (red) and no-choice (blue) conditions. Anywhere that the dark blue line does not fall within the shaded red region and anywhere that the dark red line does not fall within the shaded blue region are instances where there is a credible difference between conditions. Aligning with the results of the Bayesian t-test comparisons and the polynomial regression, the GPR analysis shows a substantial difference between choice and no-choice conditions between approximately the 8–12 second mark (where no-choice is stronger than choice) and the 18–28 second mark (where choice is stronger than no-choice, even to the point of non-intersection).
From the results of the GPR, we can calculate effect sizes based on the overall trajectory of mean preference (dark blue/red lines in Fig. 2).The largest difference between choice and no-choice conditions was 2.80 points on the 30-point scale, translating to a medium effect size27 of \(d = 0.44\) (SD of preference ratings = 8.62). The change in mean preference (maximum minus minimum) over the course of a trial was 3.50 in the choice condition (\(d = 0.41\)) and 5.28 in the no-choice condition (\(d = 0.61\)). As with the other analyses we ran, this provides further evidence of greater oscillation in the no-choice condition.
These difference were created by the oscillations in preference strength. While the GPR shows oscillating preference strength for both conditions, the greater amplitude for the oscillations of preference in no-choice condition relative to the choice condition were primarily responsible for these effects.
In Experiment 2, participants made decisions between monetary gambles rather than gift cards. These gambles had a payoff ($x) and a probability of winning the payoff (p), where the alternative was winning nothing ($0 with probability \(1-p\)). In this experiment, the timing of the initial choice or click (no-choice) response was varied randomly from 4 to 6 s. The timing of the preference ratings was varied randomly from 3 to 55 s across trials. For the basic analyses we present in this section, we look at the time after the first response—e.g., 10 s after initial response could be 14 s or more (4–6 s for the first prompt, plus response time for the first prompt, plus 10 s for the second response). In the generative model-based analyses in the next section, we consider the complete time course of a trial (before first prompt, choice RT, time to second prompt, and preference RT).
As in the first experiment, the first analysis we report is a Bayesian polynomial regression aimed at understanding the patterns of mean preference strength and how it changed over time. We used a fifth-order polynomial for consistency with the first study, allowing for 3–4 inversions in preference trajectory; though higher-order and lower-order polynomials yield similar results. To evaluate whether there were oscillations in preference, we examined the 3rd, 4th, and 5th order coefficients for both the choice and no-choice condition, and then compare the two conditions on these trends as well as the mean difference (intercept) between conditions.
The results of this polynomial regression are shown in Table 2. Reversing the pattern in the previous study, mean preference (intercept) was higher in the choice condition (\(M(b_0)=5.80\)) than it was in the no-choice condition (\(M(b_0)=5.65\); 95% HDI of difference \(M_{diff} = [-0.22, -0.07]\)). As before, the polynomial regressions were carried out within the choice and within the no-choice condition, and their values (columns 2–3 of Table 2) indicate that both conditions had some degree of oscillation. Estimates of every coefficient except the cubic component of the choice condition excluded zero, which strongly indicates the presence of oscillations in both the choice and no-choice conditions.
Furthermore, there were differences between choice and no-choice on nearly all components of the polynomial regression, beyond just a mean difference. All except the quartic component differed credibly between conditions (Table 2). We suspect that this is due to the oscillations in the two conditions being out of sync, as shown in Fig. 2, as well as the oscillations being slightly larger in the no-choice condition. This last point mimics Experiment 1, appearing to be a systematic trend across both studies. The greater amplitude indicates that choice has “stabilized” preferences, which we suggest is due to a reduction in the ontic uncertainty that happens when a person expresses their preference via choice. We cover this possibility more formally in the generative modeling section.
In addition to the polynomial regression, we also repeated the GPR analysis to gauge the evolution of preference strength over time for both conditions. For this analysis, the error of the mean GPR was set by the largest standard error of the trials within any 10-second window of delays, and the kernel was again set based on the within-subject covariance between preference ratings given to the same gamble at different time points (across different trials). The result is shown in the right panel of Fig. 2. As a reminder, the dark line indicates the pattern of mean preference, while the shaded regions lay out the variability spanned by the 95% most likely functions mapping elicitation time onto preference strength. As with the GPR for Experiment 1, we observed both instances where the mean preference strength was greater in the no-choice condition than the choice condition (blue line was above the red shaded region/red line was below the blue shaded region) and instances where mean preference strength was greater in the choice than in no-choice condition (red line was above the blue shaded region/blue line was below the red shaded region). The timing of these effects was somewhat accelerated relative to Experiment 1, likely owing to the simpler monetary gambles that had only two attributes (payoff and probability) as opposed to the four attributes in the gift cards (amount, star rating, cost, and distance). Despite this, preference strength followed a similar temporal pattern: suppression (no-choice > choice) occurred initially around 4–9 s and 24–31 s , while bolstering (choice > no-choice) occurred around 16–22 s and 34–37 s.
As in Experiment 1, we can quantify effect sizes based on the maximum differences in mean preference between and within conditions. The largest difference between choice and no-choice conditions was 0.40 on the 10-point scale, corresponding to a relatively smaller effect size of \(d=0.13\) (SD of preference ratings = 3.22). The within-condition shifts in mean preference were slightly larger than between-condition changes, with mean preference changing by 1.07 units in the choice condition (\(d = 0.33\)) and 0.56 units in the no-choice condition (\(d = 0.18\)). These are not huge effects, but are substantive enough to be worth accounting for in our dynamic theories of preferential decision making. In the next section, we outline three dynamic theories of preference change and derive their predictions for the effects observed in our experiments.
Converging evidence from both experiments indicates that preferences systematically oscillate over time and that making a choice has a significant effect on subsequent preference ratings. In particular, choice seems to make preferences more resistant to subsequent swings, reducing the overall amplitude of oscillation in preference after the decision is made. This is reflected in the coefficients of a polynomial regression (Tables 1 and 2) as well as the result of a Gaussian process regression that makes inferences over functions rather than parameters/coefficients. Put together, these results strongly support the notion that the measurement itself (choice) has an effect on preferences by reducing the ontic uncertainty in preference: when forced to make a choice, a person must clarify their preference by ruling out preferences that favor opposing options. In the language of quantum probability, measuring a person’s preference constructs a definite preference state from an indefinite one. The resulting definite state interacts with the information processing dynamics to create diverging preference in the choice condition relative to the no-choice condition, where this definite state was never imposed.
Although oscillations in preference might strike many readers as unexpected, there appears to be some precedent for similar effects in the literature. In particular, early work in cognitive dissonance uncovered instances of apparent oscillatory preference. Walster41 as well as Brehm and Wicklund42 both found a suppression effect where ratings taken before choice/no-choice were strong than those taken after a choice. Following a suppression effect at short delays, it appeared that the more typical dissonance bolstering effect (choice > no-choice) was observed at longer delays, creating an up-and-down pattern of preference strength as a function of the time at which the judgment was elicited. The results here are at a substantially shorter timescale—0–60 s rather than 0–60 min—but appear to show many of the same oscillating properties in mean preference ratings. Later work on cognitive dissonance did not focus much on the suppression effect, perhaps because the phenomena observed in these early experiments are exceptionally difficult to explain. Isolated instances of bolstering or suppression effects can perhaps be attributed to dissonance bolstering or regret, respectively, but combining them with the oscillatory patterns in mean preference could easily have made a parsimonious account of the data elusive. As we have shown here, dynamic models of preference are seriously challenged by the combination of these phenomena. Neither purely classical Markov random walks nor pure quantum walks were able to fully capture the empirical results; only by integrating two modeling frameworks were we finally able to generate a satisfactory account of the oscillation, divergence between choice and non-choice, and average trajectories of participants’ mean preferences.
The success of this hybrid, open system account suggests that our models ought to incorporate elements of classical and quantum models. In terms of uncertainty, it appears important to include both epistemic (how did an individual participant change their preference based on the stimuli?) and ontic uncertainty (how did making a decision change their preference state?) in our representations of what participants are doing during a task. The open system model does so by jointly representing classical unpredictability of how a person will evaluate a given set of options and non-classical unpredictability of what response they will generate and how the response itself will change their preferences. This multi-layered account in many ways reflects the structure of real behavior43 .
In previous work, we have constructed neural oscillator models that are able to produce the operations used in quantum walk models44. The open system model could be similarly implementable on a classical neural network—we do not require literal quantum superpositions in the brain to implement the quantum components of the model. Instead, the open system model appears to arise naturally out of real neural systems, where information processing is highly parallelized and consists of both excitatory and inhibitory interactions between neurons. Such a system is best represented by a decoherent/hybrid model like the open system approach we have presented here39. Further work on the neural processes underlying decision making could explore the implementation of these networks in the brain, testing (for example) whether the act of making a choice changes the pattern of neural activity underlying preference representation and preference change.
Using a hybrid general case of both Markov and quantum accounts conferred a secondary benefit, in that it also allowed us to test for nested models. The balance of classical-ness/quantum-ness is obtained by estimating the parameter \(\alpha\), which measures the degree of decoherence in the system. A fully coherent system including only ontic uncertainty, where a person maintains a superposition state over preference levels until they are asked to make a choice or judgment, would have resulted in estimates of \(\alpha \rightarrow 0\). Conversely, a fully decoherent system where the decision maker always had a single definite level of preference would have resulted in estimates of \(\alpha \rightarrow 1\). Neither was the case in the estimates (see Table 3), which instead indicated that a combination of these two proposals provides a better account of the data from our experiments.
All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Experiment 1 was approved by the Michigan State University Institutional Review Board (IRB #13-1214), and Experiment 2 was approved by the Max Planck Institute for Human Development Research Ethics Board. Both experiments were deemed to involve minimal risk to participants. Prior to completing the experiments, all participants were briefed on the study procedures and completed informed consent.
The two experiments were designed to test the effect of choice on dynamically shifting preferences (Fig. 1). In both experiments, participants viewed two options (restaurant gift cards in experiment 1 and monetary gambles in experiment 2) for a few seconds, then either made a choice between them (choice condition) or an unrelated motor response (no-choice condition), then made a preference rating from “strongly prefer left” to “strongly prefer right.” The timing of this rating was varied across trials of the experiments in order to understand how participants’ preferences changed when elicited at different delays. The key outcome of interest was the mean preference following choice/no-choice: the ontic uncertainty introduced by a quantum-like process should lead to diverging oscillations in preference between choice and no-choice conditions when we compare these conditions in terms of the final preference ratings.
To examine the effects of both time and decisions on preference strength, we used a task that prompted participants to rate their preference between a pair of gift cards at different time points following a choice between those gift cards or a mouse click unspecific to the options on the screen (designed to match the motor action of making a choice but not involve the cognitive component of a decision).
Each study was run in MATLAB using Psychtoolbox-349. Participants were seated in individual sound-dampening booths to complete the task. Responses (button clicks and scale selections) were gauged by tracking mouse position and left and right mouse button presses.
A total of 118 Michigan State University undergraduate students completed the experiment. Thirteen of these participants were dropped prior to full analysis because they each chose choice alternatives that were dominated on all attributes, included as ‘catch’ trials to identify participants that were not paying attention, on at least two out of the four occasions where this occurred. The remaining participants were all 18–30 years old (approximately 69% female, 31% male), and received class credit for participation in the study, which took no more than 1 h to complete.
The options we used in this task were described to participants as gift cards to local restaurants. Each gift card had attributes corresponding to its value ($10–30), the star rating of the restaurant from which it came (1–5 stars), the cost of an average meal at the restaurant ($5–25), and its distance from the Michigan State University campus (0.1–10.1 miles). Most gift cards were pseudo-randomly artificially generated, with one caveat included in the generation algorithm that forced it to create gift card pairs that spanned a wide range of attribute differences (i.e. some pairs were very similar, and some had clearly dominated alternatives). One pair of gift cards in the set of options was to a real restaurant in the Lansing/East Lansing area, with the described amount of money, Yelp/star rating, distance, and an approximate meal cost calculated based on the mean cost of main course meals at that restaurant. To incentivize honest and careful performance on the task, participants received one of these real gift cards based on the choice (receiving the gift card they chose) or preference rating (receiving the gift card they rated higher) that they gave on the trial when the real gift card pair was presented.
The task is shown in Fig. 1, upper panels. It involved making decisions and judgments about the pairs of gift cards to local restaurants. We contrasted two main conditions: a choice and a no-choice condition. In both conditions, during a trial, participants saw all four attributes for both gift cards (the amount of money on the gift card, the star rating of the restaurant, the cost of an average meal at the restaurant, and its distance from campus). In the choice condition, they would choose the item they preferred after five seconds by clicking the left or right mouse button (to choose the item on the left or right, respectively). In the no-choice condition, they would click either the left or right mouse button as they had been instructed at the beginning of that block of trials.
In both conditions, at time \(t_2\), participants subsequently rated their preference between the gift cards from 0 to 30 on either side of a scale (see the rightmost panel of Fig. 3); 30 on the right would mean they strongly preferred the right-hand gift card, while 30 on the left would mean they strongly preferred the left-hand one. The timing of this preference rating was the same in the choice and no-choice conditions, allowing us to precisely map out how preferences for a chosen item change over time relative to a meaningful baseline.
Participants were randomly assigned to the choice or the no-choice condition based on the session they attended, and were introduced to their specific condition of the experiment (i.e. participants in the choice condition did not see the directions for the no-choice condition). They were then seated in a sound-dampening booth and saw 48 trials of this condition of the choice/no-choice task outlined above during the experiment. These trials were blocked into groups of 12 trials, and participants in the no-choice condition would receive directions about whether to click the left or right mouse button at the beginning of each block (choice condition participants simply saw the same directions each block, telling them to click the button corresponding to the alternative they preferred). The time between \(t_0\) (stimulus onset) and \(t_1\) (choice or click response) was set to 5 s, at which time they were prompted to make their response with a 400 Hz auditory beep. Additionally, the time between \(t_1\) and \(t_2\) (preference rating) was set to 3/6/9/18/30/45 s (only one preference judgment per trial), and they were again prompted with a 400 Hz beep to make their preference response. After participants completed the task, they filled out a survey about the importance they placed on each gift card attribute and were debriefed about the aims of the study.
Study 1 aimed at identifying differences between choice and no-choice conditions at particular time points, but the findings could potentially be sensitive to the specific decision and judgment timings, the between-subjects design, or the specific options used. Experiment 2 was designed to replicate the findings from Experiment 1 in a more robust design where we used variable timing for both decisions and judgments as well as more classic gamble options commonly used in judgment and decision making experiments. It allowed us to vary the decision time and the time between choice (or the motor response in no-choice conditions) and preference judgments, and incentivize the selections more completely by paying participants according to the selections and ratings they made during the experiment.
The participants for Experiment 2 were 62 paid participants recruited from the subject pool at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development. Demographic information for the individuals in this study is not available, but on average, participants from this pool were approximately 25 years old (SD \(\sim 3\) years), 93% students, and 50% female/50% male participants. They were paid eight euros for completing the experiment, and an additional bonus based on the outcomes of two of the gambles they chose or rated highly during the course of the experiment. For every 100 points participants received from the gambles, they received a bonus of one euro, for an average of five euros bonus across participants. The experiment took participants approximately an hour to complete.
The options for this experiment were pairs of gambles, where each gamble consisted of an outcome in terms of points and a percentage of winning that outcome. For all gambles, participants were told that the alternative outcome (if they did not win the gamble) was 0 points.
Participants saw 20 pairs of gambles per block. Half of these (ten pairs) were repeated across blocks of trials, with their position on the screen randomized between left and right. These repeated gambles were specifically selected to be different in their attributes: one gamble would be high payoff/low probability and the other would be low payoff/high probability. The other half of the gamble pairs in each block were randomly generated, with the payoff being loosely negatively correlated with the probability of the outcome in order to avoid a high frequency of dominated gambles. There were not substantial differences in behavior between the random and repeated gambles, so we pool the results for the analyses presented below.
An outline of the task is shown in the bottom of Fig. 1 (main text). It structure was highly similar to the gift card task, with the caveat that decision times and the time between choice and confidence were randomly sampled from a uniform distribution rather than taken at fixed delays. As in Experiment 1, each trial featured only one initial response (choice/no-choice) and one subsequent preference rating.
Each trial began when a participant clicked the fixation in the middle of the screen. The time from stimulus onset to the initial response was randomly drawn from 4 to 6 s. As before, the initial response depended on a condition manipulation of choice or no-choice. In the choice condition, participants clicked the left or right mouse button to indicate which gamble they favored. In the no-choice condition, they simply pressed the left or right mouse button according to the directions they received at the beginning of the block. As opposed to experiment 1, where the choice/no-choice manipulation was done across participants, both conditions were shown to the same participant across different blocks in experiment 2.
After a participant made their first response, the time until to the prompt for a preference rating was 2–50 s, randomly drawn for each trial. The preference scale appeared after their first response, but was greyed out until they were prompted to respond with an auditory beep. The scale then lit up and the mouse re-appeared on the screen. To make their second response, participants moved their mouse from the middle of the screen to the edge of the preference scale at the location of the response they wished to make, from 10 pink (strongly prefer gamble on the left) to 10 green (strongly prefer the gamble on the right). Their response was recorded as soon as the mouse crossed the response scale, as was the response time.
After each block, one additional gamble was presented. Participants were instructed to make their first response as in other trials, but rather than immediately moving onto the preference stage, they instead completed a survey in paper and pencil. The possible surveys were used as filler tasks so that participants could consider the gambles (or not) while performing another task for an extended period of time. The surveys are described in the “Supplementary methods” but the resulting data were not analyzed. Once the participant completed the paper survey, they continued the computer task by indicating they were finished with the mouse, and they were then asked to rate their preference for the pair of gambles they had seen before the survey. These special gambles were presented with a special name (e.g., “reptile”) written in color (e.g., blue) to make them memorable when they reappeared. However, preference strength between these gambles was generally weak and did not substantially differ substantially across conditions, which could be due to the intervening activity or the long delay or simple forgetting, so they are not examined in depth here.
Upon arrival, participants were briefed on the task and completed informed consent before starting the experiment. There were eight total blocks in the experiment, each consisting of 20 trials (ten repeated gambles, ten random gambles). After every two blocks of trials, participants completed a special gamble and the intervening survey.
After completing all of the blocks, two of the gambles from the experiment were played so that the participant could receive the points from those trials (or not, if they did not win the gamble). One was taken from the choice trials—the chosen gamble of the pair was played. The other gamble was taken from a random pair of gambles the participant rated during the experiment. The more strongly they rated the favored gamble of the pair, the more likely it was that they got to play that gamble. Formally, their preference on the 21-point scale was mapped directly onto a 0–1 probability of the gamble being played, so a rating of \(+5\) would mean a 75% chance of playing the right-hand gamble.
The computer would generate a random number to determine which gamble was played, then generate another random number to determine if they won the outcome of that gamble. For example, if the gamble was [600 points, 40%], a random number on 0–1 of 0.6 or higher meant that the participant received 600 points; if the number was less than 0.6, they did not receive any points from playing that gamble.
