Endovascular procedures cause transient endothelial injury but do not disrupt mature neointima in Drug Eluting Stents
Extensive application of coronary intravascular procedures has led to the increased need of understanding the injury inflicted to the coronary arterial wall. We aimed to investigate acute and prolonged coronary endothelial injury as a result of guidewire use, repeated intravascular imaging and stenting. These interventions were performed in swine (N = 37) and injury was assessed per coronary segment (n = 81) using an Evans Blue dye-exclusion-test. Scanning electron microscopy and light microscopy were then used to visualize the extent and nature of acute (<4 hours) and prolonged (5 days) endothelial injury. Guidewire and imaging injury was mainly associated with denudation and returned to control levels at 5 days. IVUS and OCT combined (Evans Blue staining 28 ± 16%) did not lead to more acute injury than IVUS alone (33 ± 15%). Stent placement caused most injury (85 ± 4%) and despite early stent re-endothelialization at 5 days, the endothelium proved highly permeable (97 ± 4% at 5 days; p < 0.001 vs acute). Imaging of in-stent neointima at 28 days after stent placement did not lead to neointimal rupture. Guidewire, IVUS and OCT induce acute endothelial cell damage, which does not increase during repeated imaging, and heals within 5 days. Interestingly, endothelial permeability increases 5 days post stenting despite near complete re-endothelialization.
Intravascular imaging using Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) yields detailed information of vascular architecture and may enhance efficacy of percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI)1. IVUS and OCT are considered safe2,3,4, but imaging can induce endothelial injury and, while rare, can induce thrombotic complications5. This could be of importance with respect to antithrombotic protection when employing repeated imaging strategies. In a similar fashion, interventions such as stent placement, mechanical thrombectomy and other arterial probing techniques are expected to yield injury6.
Manipulation such as stents and guiding catheters are known to induce vascular injury7,8. Guiding catheters can induce sustained caliber changes in the radial artery up to one year after its use as access for coronary angiography8. Bare metal stents (BMS) show endothelial dysfunction for at least three months following stenting in healthy coronary arteries7 and this is possibly worse in drug eluting stents (DES)9.
While imaging catheters are small in diameter and more flexible than guiding catheters, it is unknown to what extent they induce endothelial injury, whether they differ from each other, whether repeated imaging increases this injury, and how injury heals over time. Moreover, neointima in stents and especially in DES can be thin and potentially pro-thrombogenic5.
We therefore set out to assess acute injury induced by different intravascular imaging modalities in comparison to guidewire placement and direct stenting. The extent of vascular injury and subsequent healing was assessed acutely and, in a smaller set, at 5 days follow-up by dye-exclusion testing and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In addition, to test intimal fragility, we assessed acute imaging-induced injury of in-stent neointima at 28 days following DES and BMS placement, using light microscopy.
All animals completed the study and data is given in Table 1 and illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4. Vessels treated with a catheter or guidewire showed more acute injury than the control group (p < 0.01). Sequential imaging after guidewire usage by IVUS and OCT did not result in an increase in the amount of staining as compared to IVUS alone. As expected, stenting induced significantly more injury (85%, p < 0.001 vs. all), but islands of undamaged endothelium were still clearly present (Fig. 4A).
Vessel wall injury. Scanning electron microscopy overviews, details in relation to the Evans Blue dye-exclusion test (right) showing vascular injury by means of different imaging catheters. Images show that vascular imaging as well as engaging an artery with a guidewire induce vascular injury. (A) Guidewire; (B) IVUS imaging; (C) IVUS + OCT imaging, (D) control artery without injury. IVUS = Intravascular ultrasound; OCT = optical coherence tomography.
Vessel wall injury after stenting. Evans Blue Dye-exclusion acute (A) and at 5 days following stent implantation (B). The non-stented adjacent segments clearly indicate areas of damage inflicted by the guidewire and the stent delivery system during stent placement. At 5 days, the injury inflicted by the guidewire and delivery system has been repaired (*) while stent induced permeability is still present both between and over the stent struts, despite a near complete endothelial stent strut coverage (C,D).
Data is summarized in Table 1 and illustrated in Fig. 4. At 5 days follow-up, EB staining of all imaged segments had reduced to background levels except for sites of extensive guiding catheter induced damage of the ostium. The differences between imaging catheters and the control were not present anymore. Injury after stenting however was still significantly different (p < 0.001 vs. all). Actually, stenting showed an increase in permeability as compared to acute injury (p < 0.001), which was mainly due to an increased permeability between the stent struts (Fig. 4B,C).
In general, SEM showed that EB staining was associated with either overt endothelial denudation or injured but present endothelium, whereas unstained areas showed an intact endothelium. Examples for each of the catheters are given in Fig. 3 and show that guidewire injury was restricted to the endothelium and did not induce deep injury. Similarly, the imaging catheters did not inflict severe injury to the arterial wall, although they did induce platelet adhesion. The prolonged injury, visible at 5 days following imaging and stenting, is illustrated in Fig. 4 and consisted mostly of activated endothelium (leukocyte adhesion, surface folds) as overt denudation was no longer observed. Even in the stents, re-endothelialisation was near complete overlying the struts. We did observe (once) more deep injury at the tip of a Twin-pass used for wire exchange.
Despite the fact that the NI was extremely thin in some DES, imaging did not disrupt this thin NI, often classified as fragile. Overall, imaging resulted in removal of endothelium and subsequent localized oedema formation (Fig. 5). Oedema formation was observed both in BMS and DES alike. In addition, we observed the formation of micro thrombi and adhesion of leukocytes (Fig. 6). In non-imaged control stents, denudation of endothelium was not observed and formation of platelet carpets, leukocyte adhesion and oedema were observed significantly less (p = 0,002; p = 1,7E-9; p = 1,2E-8, respectively). There were no statistical differences between the three different stents. Semi quantitative scoring of these parameters is given in Table 2.
Histology after stenting. Microscopy of control (A) and imaged (B) stent segment showing acute oedema (arrows) as a result of imaging induced denudation. Haematoxylin Eosin stain.
Denudated segments. Microscopy of denuded segments showing microthrombi (A, arrow) and leukocyte adhesion (B, arrow). Haematoxylin Eosin stain.
The use of intracoronary imaging or pressure measurements to guide PCI is considered good clinical practice13. Indeed, coronary imaging yields detailed information of the vascular architecture, and coronary pressure measurements were shown to improve clinical results14. In this preclinical study, we investigated the vessel wall injury caused by frequently used imaging modalities and stenting during PCI on a microscopic level.
While clinicians are aware that manipulation results in vascular injury, to date, it is still unknown to what extent intravascular imaging, and especially sequential imaging, induces coronary injury and how this injury heals over time. IVUS imaging alone induced endothelial injury of approximately 30% of the surface area. Importantly, we found that sequential imaging did not increase the area of endothelial injury. Injury caused by intravascular imaging and guidewires healed relatively fast and the increased permeability returned to baseline values within 5 days.
Stent implantation is more traumatic for the arterial vessel wall. Acute injury is significantly higher and persists longer than for the other catheters examined. The damage is not restricted to the inner layer of the vessel wall but is likely also deeper. Five days after implantation, when re-endothelialisation in these models is well underway towards completion, it even showed a significant increase in permeability despite endothelial coverage. This might for instance be due to increased stiffness of the artery15, the presence of thrombus and inflammatory cells, and the chronic injury inflicted on the vasculature by stents16,17.
Imaging of DES could be considered a risky undertaking since DES have long been associated with delayed healing, thin NI coverage and increased thrombogenicity18. Surprisingly, imaging of DES did not disrupt the NI, despite the fact that it was extremely thin in some DES. Classification of a thin NI as fragile should therefore perhaps be reconsidered. In clinical practice BMS are still preferred over DES, in specific patient groups, for example when surgical interventions are planned and early discontinuation of DAPT is needed. However, it has been argued that risk of late stent thrombosis in DES is nowadays so low that DES should be preferred over BMS in all cases19,20. Our data support this point-of-view.
Regardless, it might be considered good clinical practice to pre-treat elective patients with DAPT and keep them on this regimen for a while, to prevent thrombotic complications following imaging of all stents and scaffolds. The current study indicates that less than 5 days are needed for vascular healing following imaging in swine coronary arteries. Assuming that diseased arteries heal slower, antithrombotic prophylaxis during a period of approximately two-to-three weeks might be considered a safe period following intravascular imaging21.
Endothelial denudation is an integral part of many animal models of atherosclerosis and mural thrombosis can be involved in plaque growth. As such, denudation might be considered to pose a risk in increasing restenosis. While repeated guiding catheter changes using the radial approach have been associated with incremental structural and functional changes to the vasculature22, intravascular imaging induces less damaging injury. Data from heart transplant patients who are subjected to repeated IVUS imaging have shown immediate and 1 year safety23,24 and, similarly, OCT has shown a good safety profile2,4. Indeed, our data show that the injury that is inflicted during vascular imaging and guidewire manipulation is mostly superficial and heals within a short time frame, while guiding catheter injury remains clearly visible. In addition, imaging of in-stent NI did not show a response that exceeded injury of normal arteries. While this response may be exaggerated in an atherosclerotic model, we do not expect imaging to lead to adverse events. Indeed, given the data from the literature, it is not expected that this superficial and temporary endothelial denudation will result in more clinical restenosis in PCI treated segments.
