Information gain modulates brain activity evoked by reading
The human brain processes language to optimise efficient communication. Studies have shown extensive evidence that the brain’s response to language is affected both by lower-level features, such as word-length and frequency, and syntactic and semantic violations within sentences. However, our understanding on cognitive processes at discourse level remains limited: How does the relationship between words and the wider topic one is reading about affect language processing? We propose an information theoretic model to explain cognitive resourcing. In a study in which participants read sentences from Wikipedia entries, we show information gain, an information theoretic measure that quantifies the specificity of a word given its topic context, modulates word-synchronised brain activity in the EEG. Words with high information gain amplified a slow positive shift in the event related potential. To show that the effect persists for individual and unseen brain responses, we furthermore show that a classifier trained on EEG data can successfully predict information gain from previously unseen EEG. The findings suggest that biological information processing seeks to maximise performance subject to constraints on information capacity.
Human cognition and language are intimately related. On the one hand, the human cognitive system is sensitive to properties of the language input. Word frequency, recognition, ambiguity, and ease of processing drive attention, understanding, and memory1,2,3. On the other hand, human cognition has likely influenced the structure and properties of language itself4. For example, the large amount of redundancy in the structure of language facilitates learning5, while word lengths are optimised for efficient communication6,7.
Consequently, the demands on our cognitive system vary widely while reading, requiring us to dynamically allocate cognitive resources to process words and their syntactic and semantic dependencies. Eye-tracking studies show that while reading about the topic “cats” in a sentence such as “The cat is a carnivorous, usually furry mammal”, we will focus longer on informative, specific words like “cat”, “carnivorous”, and “mammal”, and less on uninformative words like “the”, “is”, “usually”, and “a”8,9. In order to efficiently gain topical meaning, we need to allocate our cognitive resources strategically towards those words that carry specific information.
EEG research has provided information about the dynamics of this strategic process by investigating brain responses to psycholinguistic anomalies. For example, a semantically unexpected closure in a sentence such as ‘He spread the warm bread with socks’ evokes a brain potential with a typical negative polarity and temporal signature - ca. 400 ms after viewing the last word10. This pattern of unexpected words evoking N400s has since been related to a process of semantic integration, with words failing to easily integrate consistently provoking N400s11. Early research on neurolinguistics suggested a dissociation between N400s and the P600, with syntactic anomalies, such as in a sentence like ‘The spoilt child throw the ball aside’, evoking a positive potential occurring ca. 200 ms after the N40012. However, further research cast doubt on the clear semantic/syntactic distinction, as it was shown that P600s could be provoked by processing difficulty and discourse complexity even without syntactic errors13.
While systematically introducing linguistic anomalies in controlled experiments has provided rich evidence on the temporal dynamics of sentence comprehension, the neurodynamics of natural reading at the discourse level remains little understood. Most experiments that have aimed towards natural language stimuli presented participants with words or sentences with little or no context; at best using individual sentences, words and their immediate context, such as words in a sentence around the stimuli word14. These studies have revealed N400 effects for word surprisal in a word sequence15 as well as amplified event-related potentials (ERPs) in response to general lexical statistics, such as frequency and word length16,17. Early research18 presented paragraphs of instructive text to participants, either with title, or without a title, the latter causing strong difficulty in comprehension. Analyzing the averaged ERPs to words from the latter condition, it was shown that sentences that were difficult to understand amplified the N400 to words within those sentences.
As a result, it is known that the statistical properties underlying language, cognition, and the event related potential to words are related, but the exact nature of this relationship remains elusive. While specific linguistic properties, such as word frequency, word length, position, and surprisal have been found to correlate with ERP components, these alone cannot sufficiently determine the synchronization and desynchronization of brain evoked activity as occurring at a discourse level. For example, while “carnivorous” is not only a lengthy adjective, it is also strongly specific to far fewer subjects than, for example, “usually”: it carries particular information regarding the topical context.
Here, we study whether the efficient coding principle19,20 can be used to explain linguistic processing in the human brain. According to the efficient coding principle, a cognitive information processing system aims to minimize the cost of perceptual error in order to detect generalizable and discriminative features in perceived stimuli when the system’s information processing capacities are limited21,22.
Previous studies have used efficient coding to explain the discrimination of low-level cognitive responses, such as visual or auditory perception20,23. We investigate whether the efficient coding principle can be used to explain higher-level discrimination tasks when reading natural language. In natural language, words can be understood as the units of a message and they code information in documents to convey (or signify) a more complex message. We hypothesize that in processing language the human cognitive system is continually engaged in discriminating between complex messages by allocating cognitive resources to the words that provide maximal information about the intended message.
We build on information theory and operationalize the discriminatory power of words by measuring the information gain of each word within a document corpora20,24,25. Information gain quantifies the reduction of uncertainty of the message (in this case, document) given a perceived message unit (word) from that document26. Intuitively, information gain answers the question “given a limited amount of message units (words), which units should be selected from a document to describe the information in that document most efficiently”. The full formal definition of the information gain model along with examples is provided in the supplementary material S1 and summarised in materials and methods under information gain subsection.
To study the effect of efficient coding of language on brain activity, an experiment connecting natural reading and brain activity was conducted. Information gain was computed for words in document context by using the entire English Wikipedia corpora and the EEG of participants was recorded while they were reading a sample of these documents. We hypothesised that the computed information gain of words modulates changes in ERPs indicating cognitive resource allocation following the efficient coding principle.
Specific ERP components have previously been related to specific stages of processing, from orthographic and lexical (P200, P30027), to semantic and syntactic levels (N400, P60011,28,29,30). If information gain would modulate the later (N400, P600) components, it could theoretically be due to the present word’s semantic content, and thus have bottom-up effects on information processing. On the other hand, if information gain modulated early (P200, P300) components occurring prior to semantic processing, current psycholinguistic theory suggests it must be the result of top-down effects of the preceding linguistic context. Efficient coding would predict that information gain should have top-down effects on information processing, as early detection of high information gain would enable divestment of cognitive resources from late semantic and syntactic linguistic stages. Thus, by exploring the specific linguistic stage during which information gain would affect the ERP, we expected to uncover important information regarding the degree to which information gain modulated bottom-up or top-down word processing.
In our analysis we first focus on whether information gain modulates the brain activity evoked by reading a word. We then investigate whether the specific components are reliably modulated, after controlling for previously known linguistic properties. This may uncover whether information gain can be temporarily dissociated between components, and furthermore may hint towards the top-down and bottom-up effects of information gain. We then investigate whether not only are ERPs modulated by information gain, they can also predict by reverse inference the information gain from a previously unseen sample of EEG data in a single-trial machine learning setting.
Visual inspection of the grand average ERPs suggested two distinct states in which low and high information gain modulated the ERP. As shown in Movie S1 (an animated scalp topography of the difference wave), low information gain evoked increased frontal positivity at ca. 200 ms, which we identified with a P200, maximal over Fz. Following ca. 250 ms, this was replaced by a long lasting (until ca. 700 ms) positivity over parietal sites (see Fig. 1 [right panel]). As illustrated in Fig. 1 (middle panel), this could be related to a unitary, long-lasting Early Positive Shift (EPS) affecting the ERP over parietal electrodes from ca. 250 ms.
Left: Occurrences of information gains for all words presented to the participants, with the dashed line marking the split between words associated with high and low information gain. On the right side of the plot are displayed example words ordered by their information gain (descending). Centre: Grand average event-related potential at the Pz channel for words associated with high/low information gain. The shaded areas represent a 95% confidence interval. The dashed line marks the onsets of the next stimulus. Right: A scalp topography of the differences of ERPs between low information gain words and high information gain words for the time interval 250–1000 ms post-stimuli. Each contour line marks a 1 μV difference in voltage. The Pz electrode is highlighted with a rectangle.
To identify whether information gain accounts for this EPS, a linear mixed model was defined, with word log-frequency (given the whole corpus), word length (number of characters), word class (functional/content word), and document preference (subjectively selected interest of a participant towards a topic of the document) as factors. Information gain was added as a fixed effect, and the increase in model fit was calculated using the χ2. As summarised in Table 1, information gain significantly contributed to model fit for the EPS, with χ2 = 5.98, p < 0.05. In addition to information gain, the EPS was substantially affected by Word length, β = 0.064, and Word log-frequency, β = 0.072 but not Word class or Document preference, βs < 0.012.
Alternatively, the seemingly long-lasting EPS could be the result of a summation of components that separately contribute to the common channel: i.e., an increased P300, a decreased N400, and an increased P600. For this reason, analysis for effects of separate ERP components were conducted.
Four additional linear mixed models were defined for the ERP-components P200, P300, N400, and P600. The models were formulated and the significance was tested as with the EPS.
As summarised in Table 2, information gain significantly contributed to model fit for N400, χ2 = 7.73, p < 0.05, but not the other components. Two of the controlled factors, Word class and Document preference, did not contribute substantially to any of the components, βs < 0.020. Word length, in contrast, affected all components, from the P200, β = 0.030, to more than doubling in effect on N400, β = 0.082, before decreasing for the P600, β = 0.030. Word log-frequency had a substantial effect on the N400, β = 0.100, and a smaller effect on P200, β = 0.062, and P600, β = 0.040.
The effect of information gain remained positive and high on all of the studied components. It varied between β = 0.053 (P300) and β = 0.116 (N400). We found a significant effect for the N400 component, χ2 = 7.73, p < 0.05. The effect of information gain was non-significant for the P200, χ2 = 4.68, p = 0.12.
Thus, even controlling for known effects of word-length, word log-frequency, and word class, information gain was shown to provide additional explanatory value in the EPS and the N400 component.
Many of the statistical measures used for studying language in a neurophysiological context were found to highly correlate with each other. Table 3 displays the correlations between information gain, log-frequency, and word length. A substantial correlation is found with all of the measures, with information gain and log-frequency being highly inversely correlated, with a Pearson correlation −0.98. Due to this intercorrelatedness, it is likely that no single effect can explain all of these differences, and the differences thus reflect a mixture of multiple simultaneous neural processes affected by different characteristics of words.
To gain insight to the interactions between the three measures, the shape of their distributions and rank of words given by each measure were compared. Figure 2 depicts the distributions of the measures, with the locations of three words berenberg, university, however, and is plotted as color-coded horizontal bars in each plot. These words were chosen to depict the differences of each measure with relation to information gain. The word berenberg has the highest information gain, with the others having a lower information gain, in a descending order.
Comparison of linguistic measures for words displayed to the participants in the study. Distributions for length, log-frequency and information gain are depicted as violin plots. The words berenberg, university, however, and is are marked by color-coded horizontal lines in each distribution. Note that the vertical axis of log-frequency has been reversed for easier comparison of the distributions. The jaggedness of the length distribution is caused by the distribution being discrete, while the other two are continuous.
It can be clearly observed that log-frequency and information gain behave similarly, while the distribution of word lengths somewhat differs from these two measures. Information gain tends to push words with extreme values away from the distribution mean (e.g. berenberg to the top, is to the bottom) as compared to log frequency. Also, university and however have switched ranks, with university ranking higher than however, while the opposite is true for log-frequency. This is explained by information gain taking in to account the document context in which the words appear. The word however may be rarer in the full corpus, but is not as good at discriminating documents as university. Despite the high correlation between the measures, our aim was to determine the independent effect of information gain. Therefore, the effects of word length and log-frequency were controlled when testing the significance of information gain.
The EPS was found to be parsimonious and the effect was present across ERP components. In order to study whether the EPS could be used as a neural marker for information gain, we built a predictive model to reveal the effectiveness of the EPS in estimating information gain in a single-trial classification setting. Per-subject linear classifiers which predicted the information gain class (low/high) of ERPs were trained. A single-trial prediction setting was used in which ERPs used for validating the classifier were not used in training the classifier (The specific evaluation setting is given in materials and methods under prediction subsection). The average classifier AUC score over all participants was 0.641. The classifiers of all subjects performed significantly better than random-permutation classifiers (AUC = 0.5, p < 0.01). The AUC scores of the classifiers can be seen in Fig. 3.
The classifiers’ AUC scores for each subject and reading task. The dashed line marks the performance of a random-permutation classifier.
Illustrating classification results, Table 4 shows examples of words from three randomly selected documents, with the words grouped by their predicted information gain. The prediction confidence for words to belong to the low information gain class was computed over all participants and reading tasks. The first two columns show the five words which had the highest classifier confidence for belonging to the low information gain class and the five words with the lowest actual information gain (ground truth) in the selected documents. The remaining two columns show the five words which had the highest classifier confidence for belonging to the high information gain class and highest actual information gain. For example, the word ’housecat’ had the second highest classifier confidence for belonging to the low information gain class of all the words in the document about cats, and the same word had the lowest information gain of the words in the document.
A clear difference between the words in the high/low information gain predicted classes was observed. The words in the low predicted information gain column are informative to the source document (e.g.’eruption’,’tectonic’,’atmosphere’ for document’volcano’) and resemble the ground truth. On the other hand, words in the high predicted information gain class tend to be short functional words, which are intuitively not very informative. The full list of top 5 predicted/ground truth words for all documents and classes can be found in Table S3.
We set out to study whether information gain, a measure based on the efficient coding theory19,20, could explain brain activity occurring during natural reading. Our findings show that computationally quantified information gain modulates brain activity evoked by reading natural language, suggesting that the efficient coding principle may partially explain high-level language processing. We furthermore show that it is possible to predict information gain from individual event-related potentials with machine learning methods.
Since words with high information gain are frequent in only a few documents and low information gain words are infrequent or non-existing in most of the documents in a corpus, information gain can be seen as a measure of the context specificity of a word. For instance, the high information gain words for the document Rome  as displayed in Table 4 are bramante, bernini, sistine, tiber, and michelangelo. At a first glance it might seem odd that the word rome is not one of the five words with the highest information gain in the document. While the word rome is undoubtedly relevant to the Rome document, it is not the most context specific word of the document. For instance, the word rome may appear in documents discussing popular travel destinations, football teams, or religion. The high information gain words, on the other hand, are tightly connected to the topic of the document; the capital of Italy and an ancient empire. Thus, bramante, bernini, sistine, tiber, and michelangelo are more specific and have a high information gain to discriminate the underlying message that the document conveys.
Analysis of the ERPs showed low information gain to evoke an Early Positive Shift (EPS), affecting the potential in the P200-P600 range. Separate analysis of the P200, P300, N400, and P600 while controlling for lower-level language properties, showed information gain to contribute particularly to the N400-component. As, however, the effect of information gain was similar across P300, N400, and P600 components, an explanation involving a single information gain-evoked EPS describes the effect more parsimoniously than one involving independently contributing effects.
To further establish the validity of ERPs predicting information gain, we used a classifier to predict which words had high and low information gain from single subject, single epochs of EEG data. Given the degree of noise inherent in EEG data, we showed surprisingly strong performance for the predictions. Thus, classifiers were able to capture the difference in ERPs related to low and high information gain.
These findings show a striking similarity between computational models of information gain and the EPS suggesting that human information processing is corresponding to statistically quantifiable informativeness of words20,31. Interestingly, a similar mechanism has been shown to be effective in various artificial information processing systems, such as search engines, automatic classification systems, and natural language processing methods, for discriminating and estimating informativeness of words in their document context32,33,34.
In terms of cognitive neuroscience, we show that brain activity synchronised with word presentation is modulated by the statistical properties that determine the informativeness of language. While consistent with early experimental findings from perception35 and neurolinguistics36, here we show the process occurring in natural language reading, as opposed to artificially constructed sentences. Furthermore, we provide evidence that even a single second of EEG data contains all required information to predict information gain. Not only is this a powerful indication that inverse inference37 is feasible, it also suggests many possibilities for applications that would profit from non-intrusive online extraction of perceived text informativeness.
Interestingly, the ERP analysis suggests an early, top-down effect of information gain that influences word reading well before semantic processing. Given that semantic repetition is known to affect the ERP at a much later stage than the observed EPS38, this indicates information gain likely has a top-down effect. In other words, the statistical structure of language provides a pre-existing context due to which high or low information gain is expected to occur.
While natural reading provides a richer, more ecological setting for the study of language comprehension than classic neurolinguistic designs, it does require critical review of various confounds that could potentially provide alternative accounts to our results. Various studies have, for example, pointed out that low level language properties such as word length and word frequency39 modulate ERPs. The seriousness of this is compounded by the fact that words that are usable in many contexts (i.e. have low information gain) tend to be frequently used and short7. On the other hand, one could argue that both word length and word frequency are manifestations of the statistical attribute of information gain, rather than the other way around, and therefore that information gain could provide a more parsimonious explanation of the previously observed effects. However, to rule out that such lower-level attributes provide alternative accounts, we statistically controlled for them. This showed that although word frequency and length were associated with the observed voltage fluctuations in the ERPs, information gain had a unique contribution to the measured ERPs, particularly as an early positive shift starting at circa 250 ms post-stimuli.
Our experimental design involved presentation of interwoven sentences from a preferred and a non-preferred document. The reasoning behind this design decision was that we aimed to control for preferential processing. For example, a strong, confounding effect of order could easily affect ERPs if participants knew in advance that information appearing would be irrelevant, causing them to disengage from the task. The results suggest that we were successful in this objective as document preference had no effect on the results (see Table 2). However, to further investigate a potential effect of document preference on semantic integration, further experiments could contrast natural sentences with sentences in scrabled order to reveal effects of sentence structure. Conversely, an experiment with deep priming for a particular topic by presenting a pre-reading task could reveal the effect of additional information gain against a predetermined baseline.
In fact, several higher-order linguistic properties have been shown to affect ERPs in language comprehension. Surprisal, predictability, and expectancy of language have been shown to affect the N400 when presented in a sentence context and controlled for semantic anomalies18,40,41. However, our results show that information gain, when observed at discourse level using natural language from documents as stimuli, is associated with consistent, but different, positive shift (EPS).
Information gain in general also provides theoretically motivated and sound computational measure that can mathematically account for a diverse range of information processing phenomena, from how we prioritise low-information gain visual features over those that are redundant42 to how motivation is provoked by it43. While this type of information-processing explanation has gradually lost prominence in the age of neuroimaging, the EPS constitutes the neurological correlate of information gain of words. This effect appears consistent, but the precise nature and localization of this effect remains to be determined.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the biological correlates to language processing follow the efficient encoding principle. Changes in synchronization and desynchronization underlying event related potentials reflect a maximization process towards informative, context specific words.
Appendix
