Incidental detection of prostate cancer with computed tomography scans
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-86972-y
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most frequent type of cancer found in men worldwide, with around one in nine men being diagnosed with PCa within their lifetime. PCa often shows no symptoms in its early stages and its diagnosis techniques are either invasive, resource intensive, or has low efficacy, making widespread early detection onerous. Inspired by the recent success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) in computer aided detection (CADe), we propose a new CNN based framework for incidental detection of clinically significant prostate cancer (csPCa) in patients who had a CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis for other reasons. While CT is generally considered insufficient to diagnose PCa due to its inferior soft tissue characterisation, our evaluations on a relatively large dataset consisting of 139 clinically significant PCa patients and 432 controls show that the proposed deep neural network pipeline can detect csPCa patients at a level that is suitable for incidental detection. The proposed pipeline achieved an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC-AUC) of 0.88 (95% Confidence Interval: 0.86–0.90) at patient level csPCa detection on CT, significantly higher than the AUCs achieved by two radiologists (0.61 and 0.70) on the same task.
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most frequent type of cancer found in men worldwide and the fifth leading cause of death by cancer. In 2018, there were 1,276,106 new cases and 358,989 deaths due to PCa1. If detected in its early stages, the survival rates of PCa are high due to slow progression of the disease2,3. Thus, with early detection and effective monitoring the odds of a patients’ survival may be improved.
There are a variety of clinically approved diagnostic methods for PCa including: prostate-specific antigen (PSA) tests, digital rectal examination, transrectal ultrasounds (TRUS), PSMA-PET scans, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). It has been identified that PSA determination in combination with transrectal ultrasound guided biopsy often leads to false-positive results and over-treatment4. The introduction of the Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) in 2012 has led to a more standardized acquisition, interpretation, and reporting of prostate MRI5,6. Due to this, multi-parametric MRI which relies heavily on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is increasingly becoming the standard of care for PCa diagnosis.
Prostate cancer generally does not present any symptoms until it becomes locally advanced or metastatic and thus can remain asymptomatic for many years7. This makes early diagnosis challenging. In the past, screening efforts have been focused on discovering these asymptomatic patients through PSA screening programs4,8. However, the extent of both benefits and harm of screening is under continuous debate as the risk of over diagnosis is substantial. Given this and the resource intensive nature of other diagnosis methods (biopsy and MRI), several countries, including Australia, do not run any prostate cancer screening programs9.
As current diagnosis methods are insufficient for incidental scanning and screening programs, exploring additional modalities could lead to the discovery of an effective tool for screening and early diagnosis for PCa. Computed Tomography (CT) imaging, for example, is more widely available than MRIs due to its speed and cheaper hardware. CTs have a high radiation dose which may lead to adverse effects in the long term meaning its use as a dedicated screening tool may not be justifiable. However, as CT scans are often taken for other reasons (where the adverse effects are already justified), using those for incidental screening may be viable. Unfortunately; in terms of prostate cancer, CT is currently considered insufficient in allowing humans to diagnose, localize, and monitor PCa due to its inferior soft tissue characterization10 compared to MRI.
Several recent studies have investigated the detection capacity of PCa in CT scans by expert radiologists. A study conducted by Jia et. al.11, on a limited cohort of 27 patients, showed that areas of focal mass-like enhancement on CT imaging directly correlates with prostate neoplasms (as revealed by multi-parametric MRI and follow-up targeted biopsy). A more recent study by Huang et al.12 investigated the use of contrast-enhanced CTs in detecting peripheral zone PCa using images from 100 patients with biopsy-proven PCa and 100 control subjects. They concluded that incidental detection of a focal area of increased enhancement in the periphery of the prostate may represent a clinically significant cancer and deserves further investigation with prostate-specific antigen measurement and correlation with other clinical risk-factors for PCa. While this is a finding in favour of using CT imaging to detect PCa; the research only shows results for cancer found within the peripheral zone which only accounts for 70% of cases. The above studies have shown the potential of using CT imaging in detecting PCa; but, further work is needed to address the small sample sizes, and limited type scope when assessing the usability of CT scans in detecting PCa.
While the above works show some promise in detecting PCa in CT imaging, training humans to find evidence of it consistently may be time consuming and expensive. By utilizing artificial intelligence (AI), along with a larger sample size of PCa cases, it may be possible to show whether PCa can be detected in CT scans or not and whether it can be used in a pipeline for incidental detection. Fortunately, there have been recent substantial improvements in AI systems being used to assist practitioners in medical image analysis tasks13. These systems which use deep convolutional neural networks (a subset of deep learning algorithms) have been gaining popularity in many fields. Several deep learning algorithms have been used successfully in computer aided detection (CADe) of PCa14,15,16,17,18,19,20. Furthermore, some studies have show that a Deep CNN model trained with T2-weighted and diffusion MRI achieves similar performance to clinical PI-RADS assessment21. However, these works have focused solely on multi-parametric MRI scans, and have overlooked other imaging techniques.
Inspired by the recent success of deep CNN models at detecting PCa in MRIs, in this paper, we investigate the use of deep CNNs for incidental detection of clinically significant prostate cancer (csPCa) in asymptomatic patients who had a CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis for another reason. Our hypothesis is that CNNs might be able to leverage subtle cues in CTs that are not visible to humans in order to boost csPCa classification performance. Our proposed CNN based pipeline for csPCa classification is trained end-to-end using patient level annotations. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work that use CT imaging in combination with a deep CNN for incidental detection of csPCa. A key challenge in training deep CNN models for medical image analysis is the limited availability of data. To overcome this issue, our proposed pipeline uses a combination of self-supervised feature learning techniques22 and data augmentation. We evaluate the performance of the proposed model on a dataset with 571 CT scans of the abdomen and pelvic region using cross-validation techniques and compare the models performance with the performance of expert radiologists on the same task.
The purpose of this study is two-fold: the first is to discover whether CTs are a possible avenue for prostate cancer detection and the second is to develop a fully automated deep learning pipeline capable of performing incidental detection of prostate cancer from CT scans. This pipeline is proposed to operate on all “at-risk” patients who undergo a CT scan, the automated pipeline would then signal an operator to perform further testing on patients with a high probability of having some form of prostate cancer. These further tests would remain unchanged from current diagnosis methods. Such an incidental screening tool would aid in the detection of prostate cancer that is in its initial asymptomatic phase, and if successful, has major implications for future incidental screening programs for other cancers.
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed CNN pipeline on CT based prostate cancer classification and compare it with the performance of radiologists (on the same task). We use Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC)25, sensitivity, specificity and Cohen’s Kappa26 matrices, computed via five-fold cross validation, to quantify the performance of the model in separating confirmed csPCA and control cases. All experiments were executed in PyTorch on a computer with Intel Xeon E5-1650 CPU with an NVIDIA GTX Titan X GPU, 16GB RAM and Ubuntu 16.04 OS.
First, the contribution of each element of the proposed pipeline was identified using an ablation study. Here, we trained models using four different variants of our pipeline: 
The results of the ablation study is presented in Table 1. The results show that the model trained without augmentation or self supervision was only able to achieve a ROC-AUC of approximately 0.82. Adding data augmentation and self supervision independently, improved the performance of the model to around 0.845 and 0.842, respectively. The model trained with both data augmentation and self-supervision was able to achieve significantly better performance (ROC-AUC \(\approx 0.877\)). The above results show that both data augmentation and patch-swap reversal based self-supervision can help the training process to converge to a model that generalizes well to test data.
Next, we compared the performance of the model on classifying prostate cancer on CTs with the performance of human experts (i.e. radiologists). Thus, for this experiment, we randomly selected 115 (or \(20\%\)) CT scans from the original dataset (one of the five folds used in the cross validation) that consisted of 28 scans from confirmed csPCA patients and 87 control patients. This data subset was then presented to two expert radiologists with 7 and 10 years of experience respectively. The radiologists examined the CT scans and annotated each scan with two labels: 1) Does the scan contain indications of csPCA (or not), and 2) A confidence level (from 0 to 5) quantifying their confidence in making the decision. In order to compute the AUC values, the annotations by the radiologist’s were converted to probabilities using the following procedure. If the radiologist had the highest confidence level (5) and had found no prostate cancer this would be considered a score of 0; likewise, if they had found prostate cancer with high confidence it would be a score of 1. If the radiologist had zero confidence, regardless of whether prostate cancer was found or not the score would be 0.5. The values between were obtained using linear interpolation on confidence level; lower confidence means the score is closer to 0.5.
Table 2 compares the performance of the proposed CNN model with the expert radiologists. The results show that the ROC-AUC for both radiologists are between 0.61-0.70. Radiologist 1 inclined towards achieving a high specificity while Radiologist 2 inclined towards achieving a high sensitivity. In comparison, the proposed CNN model has achieved a significantly higher ROC-AUC (\(\approx 0.87\)) with a specificity of 0.99. When calculating the sensitivity/specificity for the proposed CNN model, we used a threshold of 0.5 which gives a high specificity but low sensitivity of 0.56. For most applications a higher sensitivity is desired27, but in incidental detection applications it can be argued that a higher specificity is useful to push uncertain cases towards further testing. If a higher sensitivity is required, one can set the threshold to 0.2 which will give both a sensitivity and specificity of \(\approx 0.8\), the full spectrum of sensitivities and specificities for the complete dataset is shown in Fig. 5.
Sensitivity and Specificity Curves of the Proposed CNN Pipeline with respect to the chosen threshold.
Table 3 shows the Cohen’s Kappa Agreement between the proposed CNN model, radiologists, and the ground truth labels. Cohen’s Kappa is a measure between \((-1, 1)\) where a value of 0 indicate no agreement and a value of \(+1\) indicate perfect agreement and \(-1\) indicates perfect disagreement. An interpretation for Cohen’s Kappa values in the context of medical data is provided by McHugh28 (see Table 3). The results show that the agreement between the proposed CNN model and ground truth labels is moderate. However, the two radiologists showed minimal to no agreement with the ground truth labels. Furthermore, the agreement between the two radiologists in csPCA scan classification is also minimal.
The above results, inline with the previous observations, show that for humans, CT scans do not provide adequate information to classify csPCA accurately10. Our results are lower compared to the observations made by Huang et al.12 who showed humans were able to identify peripheral zone cancer with a high sensitivity and specificity (0.83 and 0.92, respectively). There are several differences between Huang et al.’s work and this: most notably Huang et al. included clinically non-significant PCa (with Gleason scores of 3+3 and ISUP 1 or higher), as well as excluding cases with severe prostatomegaly, extensive calcification, and hip replacements, and cases of PCa that were within the transition zone. Overall, these exclusions make the task of detection of PCa in CTs easier, and are less representative of daily clinical practice as opposed to a non-curated set of samples. Similarly to Huang et al., the radiologists in our experiments, routinely review the prostate on CT scans. However it is often difficult to identify small or early prostate cancer and therefore in daily clinical practice they would raise the possibility of prostate cancer when they identify cases with large enhancing tumours, when the tumour extends beyond the prostate or when they identify lymph node and bone metastasis.
The proposed CNN model has been able to utilize the information in CT scans to classify clinically significant PCa cases vs cases with no known PCa at a level that is deemed adequate for incidental detection of PCa.
ROC Curve of the proposed CNN model in comparison to the sensitivity and specificity of the two radiologists, PI-RADS, and deep learning systems on MRIs by Schelb et al.
As discussed in the introduction, several recent studies have used deep neural network based methods to diagnose PCa in MRI. For example, Schelb et al.21 compared the PCa classification performance of a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model (trained on T2-weighted and diffusion weighted MRI (DWI)) versus clinical PI-RADS assessment. The PI-RADS had a sensitivity of 88% at specificity of 50% whereas the CNN model had a sensitivity of 92% with specificity 47%. The results show that a CNN model trained with T2-weighted and diffusion MRI achieves similar performance to clinical PI-RADS assessment. More recently, Yoo et al.18 used a dataset of 427 (175 patients with PCa and 252 patients without PCa) DWI scans with slice level expert annotations to train a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model to detect PCa. Their pipeline, achieved an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC or ROC-AUC) of 0.84 (95% confidence interval: 0.76–0.91) for patient level PCa detection.
Figure 6 shows an overview of the comparison of the proposed CNN pipeline with the reported performance of MRI based prostate cancer detection with PI-RADS and deep CNN based models, and humans observing CTs. The values for PI-RADS and the deep CNN models were obtained from Schelb et al.21. We acknowledge the fact that these values were obtained on different datasets and are not directly comparable. We do not claim that the proposed pipeline has comparable diagnostic capability to MRI based methods, our intention here is to show that the proposed pipeline had adequate performance level to be used for incidental detection.
According to Schelb et al.21, PI-RADS has a sensitivity 0.88 at specificity of 0.5 and the deep CNN model operating on MRIs had a sensitivity of 0.92 with specificity 0.47; these models place more priority on detecting positive csPCA cases than finding control samples. Figure 6 shows that the proposed CT deep learning model performs similarly to PI-RADS and other MRI-based deep learning model at equivalent sensitivities / specificities. In terms of AUC: similar deep learning systems operating on MRIs (proposed by Yoo et al.18) achieved AUCs of approximately 0.85 compared to our 0.88 on CTs. The small variations in the AUC values can likely be attributed to the use of strong data augmentation, self-supervised pre-training or different difficulty level of the datasets used. These results comparisons further indicate that CTs do hold information that is useful for classifying prostate cancer.
A significant limitation of our pipeline is the inability for the model to provide localisation information for the cancer. However; in comparison to PSA tests (another diagnosis technique that gives a probability and no localisation information), our pipeline has superior performance. According to prior research: when using a threshold of 3 ng/mL PSA tests have a sensitivity of 0.32 and specificity of 0.8529 compared to this pipeline achieving a sensitivity and specificity of 0.56 and 0.99 respectively.
We also conducted a qualitative evaluation of the proposed CNN based pipeline. For this evaluation we extracted strong false positives, false negatives, true positives, and true negatives from the model and showed them to an expert radiologist. Many of the false positive samples had other issues within the scan that were not prostate cancer; such catheters, and prostatic calculi (as seen as a small white dot in the prostate). Some examples can be seen in Fig. 7. Likewise, some of the false negatives were of scans with insufficient contrast level. This shows that the CNN model may not be robust to unseen types of anomalies in the data. Such issues can be avoided by either including more data with anomalies in the dataset or by doing an image quality classification before the images are fed to the CNN model. However, for the strong true positives no trend was seen, giving some evidence that there is no confounding element that the CNN identifies as PCa incorrectly.
A set of examples showing different artifacts that were found within the dataset: metallic objects causing spikes of noise, calculi within the prostate, and catheters.
