Phenotyping chronic tinnitus patients using self-report questionnaire data: cluster analysis and visual comparison
Chronic tinnitus is a complex, multi-factorial symptom that requires careful assessment and management. Evidence-based therapeutic approaches involve audiological and psychological treatment components. However, not everyone benefits from treatment. The identification and characterisation of patient subgroups (or “phenotypes”) may provide clinically relevant information. Due to the large number of assessment tools, data-driven methods appear to be promising. The acceptance of these empirical results can be further strengthened by a comprehensive visualisation. In this study, we used cluster analysis to identify distinct tinnitus phenotypes based on self-report questionnaire data and implemented a visualisation tool to explore phenotype idiosyncrasies. 1228 patients with chronic tinnitus from the Charité Tinnitus Center in Berlin were included. At baseline, each participant completed 14 questionnaires measuring tinnitus distress, -loudness, frequency and location, depressivity, perceived stress, quality of life, physical and mental health, pain perception, somatic symptom expression and coping attitudes. Four distinct patient phenotypes emerged from clustering: avoidant group (56.8%), psychosomatic group (14.1%), somatic group (15.2%), and distress group (13.9%). Radial bar- and line charts allowed for visual inspection and juxtaposition of major phenotype characteristics. The phenotypes differed in terms of clinical information including psychological symptoms, quality of life, coping attitudes, stress, tinnitus-related distress and pain, as well as socio-demographics. Our findings suggest that identifiable patient subgroups and their visualisation may allow for stratified treatment strategies and research designs.
Tinnitus, the perception of a phantom sound in absence of an external sound source, is a complex multi-factorially caused and maintained phenomenon. It is estimated to affect 10% and 15% of the adult population1. The associated annual economic burden amounts to US$19.4 billion in the United States2, and €6.8 billion in the Netherlands alone3. Clinical assessment of tinnitus is challenging due to its various heterogeneities. Tinnitus patients can differ with respect to perception of tinnitus (laterality, pitch, sound characteristics, frequency, permanence, chronicity), risk factors (including hearing loss, temporomandibular joint disorder, aging), comorbidities (including hyperacusis, depression, sleep disorders), perceived distress, and treatment responses4. These differences make the identification of a suitable treatment difficult. Currently, there is no consensus on or gold standard for a therapy form that is effective for every patient. Sound therapy (masking) alone is not sufficient to significantly improve tinnitus loudness and severity5. Informational counselling (minimal contact education) was found to be effective for subgroups of patients6,7. While some studies affirm the efficacy of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in reducing tinnitus impairment and distress8, others conclude that CBT is not superior to other treatments or no treatment in improving subjective tinnitus loudness and quality of life9. Similarly, tinnitus retraining (TRT) was found to be helpful in reducing tinnitus impairment and quality of life in some studies10,11, but not others12. Due to the heterogeneous nature of the tinnitus symptom as well as the unclear evidence-base as to its treatment and management, the identification of patient subgroups is vital to stratify individual pathophysiology and treatment pathways13,14,15.
Since clinically relevant subgroups have not been established yet, clustering emerges as a promising approach to identify distinct tinnitus phenotypes in a data-driven, hypothesis-free way. Clustering is the process of grouping subjects into multiple groups or clusters. The goal is that subjects within a group are similar to another and dissimilar to subjects in others groups. Previous studies found subgroups of tinnitus patients with cluster analysis based on a small number of audiometric features13, a combination of features extracted from self-reports, audiometry and psychoacoustics14, a subset of socio-demographics, tinnitus characteristics, self-reports and audiological measurements16 or neuroimaging data and socio-demographics17. Although each of these studies provided insights in tinnitus subgroup patterns we believe that to increase acceptance amongst medical practitioners, clustering results need to be presented with intuitive visualisations that show individual subgroup patterns and enable the visual juxtaposition of multiple subgroups with respect to multi-variate data. With this in mind, Schlee et al. proposed a compact radar chart visualisation that allows to juxtapose the degree of health burden between either individuals or subgroups based on multi-variate data18. While their visualisation could be applied to any disease domain, Schlee et al. demonstrated its efficacy showing subgroup differences with respect to measurements of tinnitus distress and associated comorbidities. However, Schlee et al. did not aim to visualise clustering results, but restricted themselves to pre-defined cohorts such as female vs male patients or patients with low vs high tinnitus frequency.
Hence, the goal of this study is to combine clustering for tinnitus phenotyping with visual cluster representation and juxtaposition. Firstly, we performed cluster analysis and identified distinct phenotypes in patients with chronic tinnitus based on 64 (sub-)scales and sociodemographics extracted from self-report questionnaires. Secondly, we created an intuitive radial chart visualisation to display multi-variate characteristics of a single cluster, and to facilitate comparison of multiple clusters. Prospectively, the results of this study could be used for stratified research designs and treatment approaches.
According to X-means, four clusters (referred to as phenotypes hereafter) represent an optimal solution for the given dataset. The radial barcharts in Fig. 1 visualise phenotype-individual averages for all features. Graphical summaries of phenotype value distributions for all features on their original scales are provided in Supplementary Fig. S1. The radar plot in Fig. 2 shows average scores for each variable and for all clusters. While the four phenotypes are clearly distinguishable with respect to the psychosomatic and somatic variables, the line segments for most features of the group “tinnitus characteristics” are close to the overall patient average. Phenotype 1 (PT 1) represents the largest subgroup with 697 out of 1,228 patients (56.8%). This patient subgroup is characterised by ostensibly below-average symptom expression across tinnitus-related and broader psychosomatic symptom indices, including affective symptoms, perceived stress, tinnitus-related distress and somatic symptoms, as well as (above-average) quality of life and internal resources (Fig. 1). Due to their help-seeking behaviour, presentation in clinic and wish to participate in multimodal treatment, it can be assumed that this group of patients do experience psychological distress, however aim to present themselves as healthily as possible. We therefore label this phenotype “avoidant group”. Patients in this subgroup feature proportionately high levels of education, employment and low levels of leave of absence and psychotherapeutic treatment (Table 1). PT 2 comprised 173 patients (14.1%) who reported the highest emotional and somatic burden among all PTs (Fig. 1b). More specifically, PT 2 represents a patient subgroup with high psychosomatic-comorbidity and is thus labelled “psychosomatic group”. This patient subgroup shows high tinnitus burden alongside clinically relevant impairment across all affective indices including depression, anxiety, and perceived stress. These affective symptoms appear to align with somatoform expressions of distress including somatic symptoms. Patients of these subgroup report severely reduced quality of life and reduced coping opportunities with more pessimism, less experienced self-efficacy and optimism. Patients in this subgroup feature a high proportion of patients who live alone, are unemployed or show an overall lower educational status. Patients in this cluster further appear to consult more doctors, take more leave of absence and use more psychotherapy. PT 2 patients reported the tinnitus sound to be audible in the entire head to a greater portion than the other groups. PT 3 contained 187 associated patients (15.2%) characterised by above-average scores of features measuring somatic complaints and near-average scores for affective symptoms (Fig. 1c). Since pain scores of SF8_bodilyhealth* and SSKAL_painfrequency were similarly large as PT2, this patient subset was labelled “somatic group”. PT 3 represented the oldest subgroup, with the largest proportion of female patients and largest reported time period since tinnitus onset. Unlike PT3, PT 4 (n = 171; 13.9%) exhibited above-average scores for affective scores, components of quality of life and perceived stress (Fig. 1d), e.g. mental component summary score (SF8_mentalcomp*; 0.85) and anxious depression score (BSF_anxdepression; 0.79). Hence, we label PT 4 as “distress group”. PT 4 comprises the youngest of the 4 subgroups, with the largest fraction of male patients (Table 1).
Radial barcharts visualizing the 4 phenotypes. (a) Phenotype 1 (PT1) characterises the patient subgroup with lowest health burden among all phenotypes. (b) PT2 represents the most suffering subgroup, with all of the psychosomatic and somatic measurement averages exceeding the population mean \(+\) 0.5 standard deviations (SD). PT3 (c) exhibits above population average scores for somatic indicators whereas PT4 (d) is characterised by increased distress scores, including subjective stress and perceived quality of life. Bars are arranged in a circular layout. The height of a bar shows a feature’s z-score normalised within-cluster average, and the grey line centred at the top of the bar illustrates the 95% confidence interval. The colour of a bar represents the difference of the within-cluster average from the overall patient average (PA), from − 1.5 SD below PA (dark blue) to PA (yellow) and \(+\) 1.5 SD above PA (bright red). Features were grouped into 9 categories defined by tinnitus experts. The categories are shown within the inner circle. See subsection Features for a description of each questionnaire and the extracted features.
Radial line chart juxtaposing the 4 phenotypes. In the chart, a point shows a feature’s (z-score normalised) within-phenotype average. In each feature category (labels in inner circle), points are connected with line segments. Points and lines are coloured by cluster.
In this study, we combined data-driven clustering with a novel visualisation to identify and display distinct phenotypes in a large sample of patients with chronic tinnitus. Patient data were extracted from self-report questionnaires prior to starting a multimodal treatment program. Our analysis suggests four phenotypes of patients with chronic tinnitus.
PT 1 (avoidant group) represents a large proportion of patients. Apart from the tinnitus symptom, patients in this subgroup reported few other affective or psychosomatic symptoms, and the tinnitus is used as an index- representation of experienced distress. Due to these patients’ focused presentation (“everything is okay were it not for the tinnitus”), clinicians can easily be led to believe that potential other contributors to individual distress must not require assessment. However, clinical experience strongly suggests that a thorough assessment of broader psychosocial stressors is warranted in so far as it is feasible in clinical practice environments. The psychosocial resourcefulness of this subgroup enables patients to seek help quickly and in a solution-focused manner. Good tinnitus-specific counselling and individualised (online) therapy modules featuring audiological, psychological or relaxation procedures would possibly represent an adequate treatment strategy for this patient subgroup.
PT 2 (psychosomatic group) represents 15% of patients who showed high tinnitus burden alongside clinically relevant impairment across all affective indices including depression, anxiety, and perceived stress. These affective symptoms appear to align with somatoform expressions of distress including physical complaints and somatic symptoms. Patients of these subgroup report severely reduced quality of life and reduced coping opportunities with more pessimism, less experienced self-efficacy and optimism. There is the frequently asked question as to whether increased tinnitus-related distress contributes to increases in depression or vice versa. In this group, we consider depressive or anxious symptoms to be a crucial underlying factor for general symptom burden and treatment must begin with a focus on improving mood and relieving depression. Here, tinnitus-related distress needs to be seen within a broader context of medical and psychological influencing factors that require idiosyncratic conceptualisation. According to the socio-demographic variables, this patient subgroup features a higher proportion of women, and more patients who live alone, are unemployed or show an overall lower educational status. Patients in this cluster further appear to consult more doctors, take more leaves of absence and use more psychotherapy.
PT 3 (somatic group) appears to represent a patient subgroup that is characterised by somatopsychic symptom expressions, i.e., physical symptoms that may reflect distress and/or underlying medical conditions. To adequately address the needs of this patient subgroup, multimodal interventions might include a proportion of body-oriented procedures such as relaxation exercises or physiotherapy whose effect, however, should be interpreted with regard to both direct and indirect psychological effects (e.g. through increased senses of well-being or others’ care).
Patients in PT 4 (distress group) reported above-average perceived stress, accompanied with physical exhaustion and anxious-depressive mood. This group includes rather younger, employed patients (more men), who indicated chronic distress, potentially being susceptible to burnout syndrome with subjective reduced mental capacity (“hamster wheel”), which is used as a description of the life situation even without tinnitus stress. In this subgroup, tinnitus might represent chronic stress associated with psychological vulnerabilities, environmental/work stressors and dysfunctional coping strategies. Multimodal therapy should initially focus on stress-regulation techniques, including relaxation or individually tailored behavioural modification approaches. Similar to the highly psychosomatically burdened PT 2, patients in PT 4 could also benefit from longer psychotherapeutic or multimodal treatment procedures (inpatient or rehabilitative).
The overview and juxtaposition of all clusters shows that some questionnaires and characteristics contribute a lot to differences among patient phenotypes. In particular, patient phenotypes differ substantially with respect to their coping attitudes, their stress and their perception of quality of life, as well as their tinnitus distress. Some of the questionnaire items separate well among some of the phenotypes, see e.g. the items on perceived pain and complaints. In contrast, patients do not seem to differ in their perception of tinnitus. These contributions of the questionnaires to the phenotypes indicate that phenotyping may be achievable also with less questionnaires, especially because some of the questionnaires are overlapping.
Previous studies also employed clustering algorithms to identify tinnitus subtypes13,14,16,17. It is difficult to compare our findings to theirs because of the different set of available measurements: whereas the strength of our study was a large pool of self-report questionnaire data, Tyler et al. used both self-report data and audiometrics14, Schecklmann et al. used self-report data and cordiac imaging features17, and Langguth et al. used audiometric data13. Nevertheless, PT 2 (psychosomatic suffering group) appears to match the “constant distressing tinnitus” subgroup reported by Tyler et al.14, as average scores on features measuring tinnitus-related health burden were distinctly greater than in the other subgroups. Of course, the selection of meaningful features is pivotal for the efficacy of any cluster analysis. Schlee et al. argued against the usage of single-item features like visual analogue scale measurements because of their higher susceptibility to random measurement errors, lower test-retest reliability and higher vulnerability to unknown biases18. Due to the exploratory nature of our study, we decided to include both single-item measurements and compound scores. We assigned 11 out of 15 single-item measurements into the category “Tinnitus characteristics”. Figure 2 (top-right) shows their low discriminative power, as all phenotypes’ means are close to the population average, with the exception of TINSKAL_impairment and TINSKAL_loudness. Future research might focus on identifying a subset of key questionnaires alongside a simple computational tool that will enable clinicians to match individual patients with one or more of the here identified phenotypes.
Closest to our radial bar chart visualisation is the radar chart proposed by Schlee et al.18. Their solution indeed facilitates the comparison of two subgroups by comparing the areas of their associated polygons. However, there is still the potential problem of overplotting when one wishes to compare more than 2 subgroups as we do. Hence, we did not opt to fill up the areas spanned by the connected points with colour, to avoid a polygonal that fully overlays another one. Further, since the main criterion for comparison is the polygonals’ shapes, inferences highly depend on the ordering of features around the plot which can be misleading. Schlee et al.18 tackled this problem by computing an ordering that yields areas that achieve maximum mean surface difference between subgroups and minimum surface variance within subgroups. This approach is feasible for up to a moderate (\(\approx \,20\)) number of features. In our study with 64 features, we decided to arrange features based on semantic categories, e.g. quality of life. This allows to detect and track features easier. Further, our visualisation is not specific to tinnitus but could be used to present a compact visual summary of characteristics of any condition or index symptoms subgroups. Whether the visualisations will be adopted by clinicians for finding suitable tinnitus management strategies needs to be tested. Preliminarily, clinicians suggested that graphical summaries of possible patient subtypes may alleviate allocation of modular treatment strategies to specific combinations of symptom presentations.
A potential limitation of our analysis is the exclusion of patients who did not fill all questionnaires during admission. There are several reasons why a patient may not have filled all questionnaires, including unfamiliarity with the technical devices (the questionnaires must be filled electronically), loss of motivation due to the relatively large number of questionnaires and collision with baseline examinations in the lab. The exclusion of these patients may have led to a selection bias. Nonetheless, our analysis over all 15 questionnaires allowed us to acquire insights to the contribution of these questionnaires to phenotyping, so that eventually a reduction of questionnaires might become possible. Further, our analysis is a static snapshot of phenotypes at baseline. Hence, it might be sensitive to possible changes in tinnitus perception and associated health burden over time. It is possible that a patient will transition from one phenotype to another in later stages of her life or depending on her tinnitus management. Thus, a next step would be to study the effects of treatment to these phenotypes and find whether some patient phenotypes benefit more than others. Another limitation comes from the heuristic choice of the number of phenotypes. Many works use the number of clusters as input parameter. Since this number is not known, we used the non-parametric X-Means clustering algorithm.
