Modelling collective action to change social norms around domestic violence: social dilemmas and the role of altruism
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-021-00730-z
Interventions promoting collective action have been used to prevent domestic violence in a range of settings, but their mechanisms of operation remain unclear. We formalise and combine feminist theoretical approaches to domestic violence into a game-theoretic model of women’s collective action to change gendered social norms and outcomes. We show that social norms create a social dilemma in which it is individually rational for women to abstain from action to prevent domestic violence among neighbours, but all women suffer negative consequences if none take action. Promoting altruism among women can overcome the social dilemma. Discouraging women from tolerating domestic violence, imposing additional external punishment on men for perpetrating violence, or lowering costs to women of taking action against violence may not work or even backfire. We invite researchers on community mobilisation to use our framework to frame their understandings of collective action to prevent domestic violence.
Worldwide, domestic violence is a critical concern for virtually all aspects of society, with severe human, emotional, and economic costs (Garcia-Moreno and Watts, 2011). One form of domestic violence, intimate partner violence, is estimated to affect 30% of women at least once in their lifetime, and is an important cause of mental, physical, and reproductive harm (Devries et al., 2013; Dillon et al., 2013; Hill et al., 2016). International declarations including the Sustainable development goals have committed national governments to eliminating domestic violence (UN, 2017). However, investments in prevention and services for survivors of violence remain inadequate (Garcia-Moreno and Watts, 2011).
Community mobilisation interventions have long been of interest to policymakers and practitioners as a means of addressing otherwise intractable societal and environmental barriers to improving health (Rosato et al., 2008). They can be defined as interventions in which local individuals collaborate with external agents in identifying, prioritising, and tackling the causes of ill-health based on principles of bottom-up leadership and empowerment (Rosato et al., 2008). For example, interventions in South Africa and Uganda have trained volunteer activists to take action against domestic violence, engaged community groups in reflection and action on gender norms, and organised large-scale campaigns and marches (Abramsky et al., 2014; Pronyk et al., 2006; Wagman et al., 2015).
Randomised controlled trials have shown that such interventions can reduce domestic violence in contexts of severe poverty and gender inequality (Bourey et al., 2015). However, the mechanism through which interventions achieve impact remains poorly understood (Gram et al., 2019). Existing theoretical frameworks display ‘positive a priori bias’ (Abimbola, 2019), in which interventions are assumed to produce positive engagement with communities without complications. The failure of recent interventions in Rwanda (Chatterji et al., 2020), Afghanistan (Gibbs et al., 2018), and Nepal (Clark et al., 2020) to show comparable impacts on domestic violence to those observed in Uganda (Abramsky et al., 2014; Wagman et al., 2015) underlines the need to understand contexts and mechanisms.
Community mobilisation interventions are complex interventions that involve long causal chains from implementation to outcome, multiple recursive feedback loops, and emergent outcomes (Anderson, 2008). Social scientists often use mathematical models to make explicit their assumptions behind implicit, verbal models of social phenomena (Epstein, 2008; Heckman, 2005; Oliver and Myers, 2002). This enables them to derive predictions using algebra or computer simulation, check for logical consistency of verbal explanations, and illuminate core uncertainties in existing evidence. Here, the goal is not to forecast the future or mirror reality as closely as possible, but rather to generate explanatory clarity (Epstein, 2008). Intervention researchers have proposed mathematical models as a tool to study the system dynamics of complex public health interventions (Davey et al., 2018).
We use a game-theoretic model to formalise oft-hypothesised processes of action to challenge unequal gender norms in community mobilisation interventions in low- and middle-income contexts. In so doing, we follow an established tradition in the social sciences of using mathematical models as thought experiments to generate logically consistent explanations for social phenomena (Centola et al., 2005; Oliver, 1993). We show how we can define conditions under which the prevention of domestic violence takes on the characteristics of a social dilemma (Gram et al., 2019), a situation in which it is individually rational for women to take as little action against domestic violence as possible, even though all women would be better off collectively if everybody invested in such action. We show that elaborations to the model based on assuming a degree of altruism in women can suggest solutions and provide new directions for research and policy.
According the socio-ecological framework (Heise, 1998), domestic violence results from the interplay of multiple factors at different levels of a social ecology: at the individual level, childhood experiences such as child abuse or marital violence between one’s own parents are major factors; at the relationship level, alcohol use, marital conflict and male control over decision-making play a role; at the community level social isolation of women and delinquent peer associations of men contribute; at the societal level, ideologies of male superiority and rigid gender roles also contribute. The framework has been adapted to centre the role of patriarchal ideology, male entitlement, and household gender roles (Jewkes et al., 2002). Figure 1 shows such an adapted framework.
Ideologies of male superiority combine with structural and individual risk factors to promote men’s use of violence in domestic relationship.
Social ecological frameworks provide an overview of the complexity of domestic violence, but do not generally provide specifics as to how societal ideologies manifest at the individual level or how individual actions can reproduce ideologies. Two feminist theories, the theory of Hegemonic Masculinity (Connell, 1987) and Male Peer Support Theory (DeKeseredy and Schwartz, 2013) propose a mechanism: Men belong to a gendered power hierarchy in which they are rewarded by other men for conforming to stereotypically masculine gender roles, while men who break these norms are punished. Men are socialised into believing that gender non-conforming behaviour from female partners threatens their performance of masculine gender. This makes men use domestic violence to punish female partners for gender non-conforming behaviours. In other words, ‘social norms’, defined as expectations of informal reward or sanction from others for conforming to or deviating from a behaviour, play a key role (Hechter and Opp, 2001).
Qualitative and quantitative studies find that women’s ‘disobedience’ is cited as one of the most frequent reasons for domestic violence, whether due to neglect of household work, refusal to have sex, or arguments with the husband and in-laws (Neal and Edwards, 2017). Survey studies have found that societal acceptance of wife-beating as punishment correlates with experience of violence (García-Moreno et al., 2005; Heise and Kotsadam, 2015), while accepting attitudes among peers correlates with perpetration of violence (Mulawa et al., 2018). Other studies have found one of the most important predictors of male perpetration of violence to be the presence of male peers who explicitly verbally encourage it (DeKeseredy and Schwartz, 2013). In qualitative studies, men who engage with violence prevention programmes have encountered considerable peer resistance ranging from mockery to ostracism (Gibbs et al., 2015; Mogford et al., 2015), and fear of losing peer support has been a formidable barrier to behaviour change (Daruwalla et al., 2017).
Individual behaviour change interventions primarily seek to furnish women and men with the resources, knowledge, and skills to negotiate violence in their own relationships (Bandiera et al., 2016; Green et al., 2015; Hossain et al., 2014). These may fail to work in contexts in which pervasive social norms condone or reward male perpetrators’ use of violence to maintain control over female partners (Daruwalla et al., 2017; DeKeseredy and Schwartz, 2013). A trial of a government intervention in Papua New Guinea to prevent domestic violence through increased police presence showed no impact, as men mobilised in response to the programme to maintain power over women (Cooper, 2018). Trials of interventions to financially empower women through economic self-help groups without highly participatory group education components have generally failed to show impact on intimate partner violence (Gram et al., 2020).
Community mobilisation interventions have been developed to challenge domestic violence-related social norms through a range of activities (Abramsky et al., 2014; Pronyk et al., 2006; Wagman et al., 2015). This includes engaging police, courts, shelter homes, physical and mental health services, and non-specialist community members (Daruwalla et al., 2019). They actively involve community members in decisions about intervention delivery, including the development of strategies to tackle local priority issues (Rosato et al., 2008). Their open-ended approach makes such interventions effective, but also unpredictable (Gram, et al., 2019). For example, a documentation exercise for a community-based intervention to prevent violence against women in Mumbai, India, found a plethora of community actions (Daruwalla et al., 2019) (Table 1). These ranged from negotiating with the family of a woman facing dowry harassment to organising a campaign to free a woman who was locked in her house and beaten by her partner. Amid such heterogeneity, common threads are hard to discern.
However, most theories of change for community mobilisation intervention emphasise community-driven attitude and social norm change as key drivers of reductions in levels of domestic violence (Gram et al., 2019). Process evaluations have evidenced the key role of ‘organised diffusion’—active, systematic efforts by community members themselves in diffusing anti-violence messages the wider community – in achieving impact (Cislaghi et al., 2019). The measurement and tracking of attitudes to violence against women is a standard component of impact evaluations (Abramsky et al., 2016; Chatterji et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2007). Social norms are increasingly monitored in high-income (Fabiano et al., 2003; Kilmartin et al., 2008) and low- and middle-income settings (Clark et al., 2018) too.
The next section formalises literature from this section into a stylised game-theoretic modelFootnote 1. Game theory is a formal theoretical framework for analysing interactive decision-making (Ferguson, 2013). A ‘game’ is any situation with multiple decision-makers (‘players’) whose choices impact on another. Game theory predicts the behaviour of players in a setting, where the ‘payoffs’ to strategies chosen by individuals depends on strategies adopted by other individuals in the same population (McAdams et al., 2020). Game theory is widely applied in the psychological and social sciences to model trust, cooperation, and collective action (Ferguson, 2013). Public health researchers have used it to model physician prescribing behaviour in the face of rising antimicrobial resistance (Colman et al., 2019), population behaviour under voluntary vaccination (Bauch and Earn, 2004), and social distancing behaviour during COVID-19 (McAdams, 2020), but not domestic violence prevention. The following sections assume basic familiarity with game theory, but our final discussion of research and policy implications can be grasped without prior knowledge.
By modelling collective action to address domestic violence, we walk the less trodden path. Previous mathematical models of domestic violence have focused on household-level determinants of violent behaviour, modelling domestic violence as a function of intra-household bargaining power (Bloch and Rao, 2002; Eswaran and Malhotra, 2011; Farmer and Tiefenthaler, 1997; Haushofer et al., 2019; Tauchen et al., 1991). In such models, men perpetrate violence due to intrinsic preferences for violence or for the sake of extracting resources from their female partners. Women can only prevent domestic violence by leaving the relationship, strengthening their bargaining power or acquiescing to their male partners’ demands for resources. Other models have examined intergenerational impacts on domestic violence of witnessing violence between parents as a child (Koç and Erkin, 2012; Pollak, 2004) or modelled women’s choice to report violent partners to the police (Aizer and Dal Bo, 2009). None of these modelled women’s collective efforts to change social norms.
Like all models, our model relied on assumptions for deriving predictions and explanations of behaviour. Most fundamentally, we modelled individual decision-making as a process of rational utility-maximisation. We believe this assumption is more realistic than models in which individuals act reflexively without considering costs or benefits of action (Drigo et al., 2012; Rigby and Johnson, 2017). Our assumption is consistent with evidence on social mobilisation (Rogers et al., 2018), prosocial (Bierhoff, 2005), and help-seeking (Fugate et al., 2005) behaviour, which demonstrates that individuals are sensitive to costs and benefits of such behaviour. In contrast to strict rational choice models, we included significant social and psychological components. In particular, we modelled men’s preferences for violence as being amenable to change through the sustained efforts of women in their community. This aligns with recent assessments of the evidence base in economics calling for a move towards a view of individuals as ‘enculturated actors’ whose preferences are subject to social influences (Hoff and Stiglitz, 2016).
Nonetheless, our model has limitations. First, we only modelled women’s participation in collective action. Men’s participation in action to prevent violence against women does not straightforwardly entail the presence of social dilemmas as they do not directly benefit from reduced violence; indeed, active male engagement in violence prevention has been weaker compared to female engagement in programmes involving both gendersFootnote 9 (Chakraborty et al., 2018; Hatcher et al., 2020; Jejeebhoy and Santhya, 2018). Second, our model focused on the interaction between attitudes, social norms, and behaviour, but did not explicitly model beliefs. Models of efficacy beliefs (Lemoine, 2019) can assess the impact of women under- or over-estimating their actual influence over men’s attitudes. Women may for example refrain from action because they lack confidence in their own strength. Models of ‘pluralistic ignorance’ (Centola et al., 2005), in which individuals over- or under-estimate support for a social norm, may be needed if such misperceptions prevent collective action. We did not incorporate belief updating to avoid adding complexity to an already-complex model.
