A novel nomogram model for differentiating Kawasaki disease from sepsis
Kawasaki disease (KD) is a form of systemic vasculitis that occurs in children under the age of 5 years old. Due to prolonged fever and elevated inflammatory markers that are found in both KD and sepsis, the treatment approach differs for each. We enrolled a total of 420 children (227 KD and 193 sepsis) in this study. Logistic regression and a nomogram model were used to analyze the laboratory markers. We randomly selected 247 children as the training modeling group and 173 as the validation group. After completing a logistic regression analysis, white blood cell (WBC), anemia, procalcitonin (PCT), C-reactive protein (CRP), albumin, and alanine transaminase (ALT) demonstrated a significant difference in differentiating KD from sepsis. The patients were scored according to the nomogram, and patients with scores greater than 175 were placed in the high-risk KD group. The area under the curve of the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC curve) of the modeling group was 0.873, sensitivity was 0.893, and specificity was 0.746, and the ROC curve in the validation group was 0.831, sensitivity was 0.709, and specificity was 0.795. A novel nomogram prediction model may help clinicians differentiate KD from sepsis with high accuracy.
Kawasaki disease (KD), also known as cutaneous mucosal lymph node syndrome, is an acute, self-limiting vasculitis that is common in children under the age of 5 years old, with coronary aneurysms occurring in about 25% of untreated cases. KD has also become the main cause of acquired heart disease in children1,2. Early and timely diagnosis, as well as effective treatment, can help reduce coronary artery lesions (CAL) and improve intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment response3,4. However, both the etiology and pathogenesis of KD remain unclear. Incomplete KD and Kawasaki disease shock syndrome (KDSS) are at a high risk of delayed diagnosis and heart complications. In clinical practice, incomplete KD and KDSS are often misdiagnosed as sepsis or septic shock initially, thus increasing the difficulty in making a KD diagnosis, as well as CAL complications5,6.
The differential diagnosis of KD and sepsis in the early stage of onset is challenging. Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response syndrome caused by infection, which is also an important cause of septic shock and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes (MODS)7. The main manifestations and laboratory findings of sepsis include fever, elevated white blood cell count (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin (PCT), which are also the manifestations found in KD8. Although the early clinical manifestations and laboratory results of sepsis are similar to KD, their clinical treatments differ substantially. Patients with sepsis need timely and appropriate antimicrobial treatment to control and remove the source of infection9. In contrast, antibiotics are unnecessary and ineffective for KD patients, while IVIG infusion with follow-up cardiac ultrasonography are the main treatment methods for KD2.
Both KD and sepsis are characterized by fever and elevated inflammatory markers in the acute stage, but the treatments are very different. However, from information evident in previous literature reviews, no relevant or single indicator can differentiate KD from sepsis. Therefore, we conducted a retrospective analysis of patients' medical records to set up a single or multiple index equation for clinicians in early KD evaluation to prevent cardiac injury.
We enrolled a total of 420 children (mean age: 24.4 ± 18.4 months) in this study, including 254 males (60.5%), 166 females (39.5%), 227 KD patients (54.0%), and 193 sepsis patients (46.0%). According to univariate analysis, we observed no statistically significant differences regarding gender, age, and body weight, as shown in Table 1. The KD group demonstrated statistically significant higher levels of ALT, AST, platelets, and erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR) than the sepsis group (p < 0.05), while the KD group had significantly lower levels of PCT, hemoglobin, albumin, WBC, and CRP than the sepsis group, as shown in Table 1 (p < 0.05).
KD is currently diagnosed primarily according to clinical manifestations, but no specific laboratory method is available for diagnosis. Furthermore, the diagnosis of incomplete KD is also difficult and increases delayed diagnosis. Although the clinical manifestations and laboratory findings of KD and sepsis differ, some overlap has still been noted. In particular, incomplete KD and KDSS make differentiating the diagnosis from sepsis difficult in clinical practice. The purpose of this study is to compare laboratory findings in KD and sepsis to provide specific characteristics that can help clinicians detect KD earlier.
In this study, compared to the sepsis group, the KD group showed a significant decrease in albumin. Children with KD are often associated with hypoalbuminemia, a pathogenesis that has many explanations. Previous research has reported that the albumin level of KD was significantly lower than that of the febrile control group11, indicating that the decrease of albumin may be related to the increase of vascular permeability. Said increase in vascular permeability may be caused by the increased movement of albumin from the blood vessels to the interspaces mediated by hormones, innervations, or cytokines (especially IL-2, interferon-alpha, and IL-6)12. Kuo et al. reported that the lower the albumin level, the higher the rate of CAL formation in KD13.
Anemia is one of the most common clinical features of KD and is considered to be a marker of the acute phase and disease outcome14. In one retrospective study, hemoglobin level was found to be the most important indicator for distinguishing KD from the febrile control group15. Furthermore, Lin et al. found that hemoglobin is a useful clinical indicator to distinguish KDSS from toxic shock syndrome (TSS)4. Recently, Kuo et al. reported that inflammation-induced down-regulation of hepcidin is associated with anemia in KDSS patients16. In our study, the hemoglobin level of the KD patients was significantly lower than that of the sepsis patients. From previous literature reviews, no sepsis-related anemia has yet been reported. Moreover, anemia is a good indicator for distinguishing KD from sepsis and other infectious diseases.
Previous studies have reported that elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is an important laboratory finding for KD, as well as that abnormal liver function including ALT accounts for 37% of total KD children. The elevation of ALT in most children was only slightly elevated, less than twice that of the normal threshold17,18,19. Elevated ALT is also one of the biochemical indicators for predicting IVIG resistance in KD and assisting in incomplete KD diagnosis2,20. In our study, the ALT in KD children was significantly higher than that in the sepsis patients and was found to be the most important laboratory indicator (with the highest score of 100) in this novel nomogram model.
Several studies have shown that WBC, CRP, and PCT increased in KD children21, and it has been reported that a high CRP level is one of the important laboratory indicators for predicting IVIG resistance in KD22. However, CRP, PCT, and other inflammatory indicators are also significantly increased in sepsis patients and have been proposed as potential markers for diagnosing neonatal sepsis23. Studies have shown that PCT is significantly higher in KD children than in viral infections and other autoimmune diseases24. In our study, the levels of WBC, CRP, and PCT in KD patients were increased but lower than the levels of sepsis patients, indicating that the immune-pathogenesis of KD lies somewhere between sepsis and viral infection. Antibiotics are vital for treating sepsis but may not be as important in the treatment of KD.
According to the literature review, this report is the first to identify KD and sepsis by using ordinary laboratory indicators. Based on clinical laboratory results, we constructed a novel nomogram model with five laboratory markers (WBC, anemia, CRP, PCT, and ALT) for predicting KD and sepsis, which will help clinicians treat KD and sepsis patients more precisely. Furthermore, the timely recognition and treatment of KD can reduce coronary artery damage or progression to KDSS. However, the results of this study still need to be clarified through more cases and from more areas.
Kuo et al.25 reported that among the total of 1,065 KD patients, 26 cases admitted to the ICU were identified during a 10-year study period. Shock (73.1%, n = 19) was the most common reason for KD patients to be admitted to the ICU, and ICU KD patients were more likely to receive antibiotics (but not for every KD patient), albumin infusion, and steroids, as well as to require a second dose of IVIG therapy. Kanegaye et al.26 reported that patients with KDSS may be resistant to immunoglobulin therapy and require additional anti-inflammatory treatment. In this article, antibiotics were not among the treatment suggestion for KDSS. Altogether, if patients presented with fever and hemodynamic failure with two or three signs suggesting KD, both IVIG and antibiotics were administered in case of KD with uncertain infections, or only IVIG when infections were excluded.
This is the first study to use a nomogram to develop a novel prediction model that shows that WBC, anemia, PCT, CRP, albumin, and ALT may help clinicians differentiate KD from sepsis with high accuracy.
