Self-medication with antibiotics in Maputo, Mozambique: practices, rationales and relationships
#https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-019-0385-8
Self-medication, as a form of self-care, is a common practice worldwide, and often involves the use of both over-the-counter and prescription-only medicines, including antibiotics, anti-malarials and others. Increasing concerns over the global emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance point to the need to reduce and optimise the use of antimicrobial medicines, both in human and animal health. Over the past few decades, numerous studies on self-medication with antibiotics have sought to determine the prevalence, risks and/or factors related to ‘inappropriate’ use in different parts of the world. Yet much of this literature tends to follow a rather normative approach, which regards such practices as problematic and often irrational, frequently overlooking structural aspects, situated circumstances and individuals’ own reasoning. Based on a mixed methods social science research project in Maputo, which included a household survey, observations in pharmacies and interviews with users and healthcare providers, this paper aims to discuss self-medication in light of local users’ everyday practical reasoning. While situating self-medication within local contextual contingencies, the analysis highlights the ways in which personal and socially shared experiences, articulated with forms of knowledge and information provided by different sources, shape and inform practices of and attitudes towards self-medication with antibiotics. By looking at self-medication beyond (non-)prescription use, and by examining individuals’ decisions within their socioeconomic and therapeutic landscapes in Maputo, this study sheds light on the structural and relational factors that contribute to certain consumption practices that do not always follow biomedical recommendations of ‘rational’ or ‘appropriate’ use, helping to deconstruct and further problematise the various legitimate meanings and understandings of ‘responsible’ use.
Practices of self-medication, as a form of self-care, have always triggered controversy. Yet they are common worldwide. Self-medication often involves a combination of therapeutic resources and the use of both over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription-only medicines, including antibiotics. Increasing concerns with the global emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) have pointed to the need to reduce and optimise the use of antimicrobial medicines (AMs), both in human and animal health (WHO, 2015a). This includes tackling the use of AMs without a prescription, which is considered a form of AM ‘misuse’ that can potentially accelerate the emergence of resistant microorganisms (WHO, 2015b). Over the last decades, numerous studies on self-medication with antibiotics, conducted in different parts of the world, have sought to determine the prevalence, risks and/or factors related to ‘inappropriate’ antibiotic use (e.g., Borg and Scicluna, 2002; Grigoryan et al., 2007; Elmasry et al., 2013; Albawani et al., 2017; Alghadeer et al., 2018). Although tracking OTC sales is challenging in most countries (WHO, 2015b), according to a review of Alhomoud et al. (2017, p. 4), “it has been estimated that more than 50% of antibiotics are purchased without a prescription and used over-the-counter in most parts of the world”.
Much of the literature on self-medication with antibiotics, however, tends to follow a rather normative approach, which regards such practices as problematic and often irrational, frequently overlooking structural aspects, situated circumstances and individuals’ own reasoning. Moreover, in framing antibiotic use and ultimately AMR as an ‘individual behaviour’ problem—which needs to be ‘corrected’ through regulatory restrictions and educational campaigns—such approaches neglect broader contextual and relational processes in which antibiotics and other medicines are embedded (see e.g., Tan, 1999; Rodrigues, 2016; Lambert et al., 2019; Willis and Chandler, 2019), which contrasts with the recognised ‘connectedness’ as promoted by the rhetoric of the ‘One Health’ approach (Chandler, 2019).
Adding to this broader discussion on AM use, and drawing on a social science research project on medicine use in Maputo, Mozambique, this paper aims to analyse and problematise antibiotic consumption practices beyond (non-)prescription use. I start by unpacking and discussing the very notion of self-medication, the rationales and ideologies behind it, as well as the processual backgrounds which have contributed to the spread and centrality of pharmaceuticals in individuals’ everyday lives and self-care practices. This will set the theoretical background and analytical framework, which will help to shed light on the situated rationales behind certain consumption practices and on the various meanings and understandings of ‘responsible’ use.
This article has analysed self-medication with antibiotics in light of the everyday practical reasoning (cf. Horlick-Jones et al. 2007) of local users in Maputo, situating such practices within their contextual contingencies and wider therapeutic consumption practices and relationships. As the empirical data shows, antibiotics, whether prescribed or not, are part of individuals’ everyday lives. They were present in almost half of the households I visited and, according to the household survey, one fifth of the respondents had used antibiotics in the month prior to the survey. Although, in most cases, the antibiotics had reportedly been prescribed by a health professional, in around 26% of cases the most recent antibiotic use was based on individuals’ own initiative or following relatives’ or neighbours’ advice.
Despite the considerable prevalence of self-medication practices, antibiotics and other prescription-only pharmaceuticals were seldom used as a first resort. They were amongst the most commonly used medicines, but most individuals tended to start their therapeutic consumption itineraries with ‘home remedies’ such as honey, ginger, and lemon, sometimes together with paracetamol or anti-inflammatory medicines. Only when a certain combination of symptoms was identified, and especially when fever was present, were common antibiotics generally introduced. For suspected conditions where diagnoses are generally based on laboratory tests (such as malaria), individuals were more inclined to seek medical advice in healthcare settings. However, for recurring situations where diagnoses are based on a combination of symptoms (such as tonsillitis), and for problems perceived as minor and/or under their cognitive control, individuals tended to avoid the various constraints of healthcare settings and tried to solve the problem themselves.
The influential role of health professionals, both prescribers and dispensers, in self-medication practices in Maputo was clear at different levels. According to the study participants, the most commonly used antibiotics, particularly amoxicillin but also cotrimoxazole and clavamox, were also the most prescribed and recommended; and the main reported reasons for using prescribed antibiotics, generally described in terms of symptoms—such as cough, fever, wounds and specific pains—were consistent with the main conditions self-treated with antibiotics. Indeed, as many studies have long shown (e.g., Haak, 1988; Hardon, 1991; Nichter and Vuckovic, 1994), previous medical recommendations are not only a point of reference for self-medication, but are also often used as a way of legitimising such practices. As illustrated in Maputo, repeated medical prescriptions and recommendations for common conditions increased individuals’ familiarity with certain pharmaceutical solutions, as well as with the process of identifying the health problem. Yet although they constitute a main reference for self-medication practices, as this and other studies (e.g., Lopes, 2009) have shown, individuals do not simply follow or reproduce previous medical recommendations. Medical prescriptions are evaluated according to an ‘interpretative framework’ (Schutz, 1972), based on individuals’ life-worlds and experiential knowledge, which articulates information collected from a variety of sources, including from health professionals, their personal and socially shared experiences with the medication (Lopes, 2009; Rodrigues, 2016; Fainzang, 2017), experiences with prescribers and dispensers (Kamat and Nichter, 1998), and interpretations of perceived symptoms and medical solutions. Prescriptions are, moreover, adapted according to individuals’ financial conditions, as well as to other meaningful aspects of their everyday lives.
The constructed nature of individuals’ knowledge, which differently incorporates and mobilises appropriations of technical expertise (Giddens, 1990), results in modalities of medicine use that do not always conform to health professionals’ recommendations. In this context, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds also played a role in individuals’ perceived autonomy regarding the management of certain medicines, with highly educated individuals displaying more confidence in self-medicating with antibiotics than other interviewees. They tended to have access to a wider variety of information sources and the perceived literacy necessary to understand and apply technical information to both prescribed and non-prescribed medication use. Most study participants, however, stressed the overall lack of information about medications—including that provided by prescribers, as therapeutic encounters tended to be short, vertical and prescriptive, often preventing individuals from raising questions. This reflects a wider problem of a lack of good communication between prescribing health professionals and patients, something that is widely acknowledged in the literature (see e.g., Gregory et al., 2011).
The sociocultural distancing between medical doctors and patients, especially when the latter were from a lower socio-educational background, was also reflected in the medication vocabulary used. Many individuals in Maputo did not associate some of the medicines they used, such as amoxicillin, with antibiotics. Improving communication between prescribers and users, and adjusting health campaign messages to use more contextually-significant vocabulary, could help improve awareness. However, terminology is only one example of much deeper and structural gaps that shape communication between prescribers and users. The very idea that individuals need to be educated in order to improve both the ‘rational’ use of antibiotics and prescription compliance results from a normative and medical-centred approach which neglects individuals’ engagement in their own healthcare and the ‘social and economic realities’ (Nichter and Vuckovic, 1994) of medicine prescription and use. As previously discussed, compliance tends to emphasise the legitimacy of prescribers’ actions over those of patients (Stevenson et al., 2002). The assumption that individuals should recognise such legitimacy, and therefore follow whatever is prescribed for them (or their children), regards individuals as “passive and obedient recipients of medical instructions” (Stimson, 1974 cited in Conrad, 1985), and neglects other legitimate forms of reasoning which could lead to different actions. It also assumes that medical doctors’ prescriptions are always the most ‘rational’ and legitimate, disregarding issues around over-prescribing, and other prescribing errors, which are repeatedly highlighted in the literature on antibiotics and AMR (e.g., Llor and Bjerrum, 2014), as well as the context of the prescription itself (see also Pearson et al., 2018). Moreover, as Morgan et al. (2011, p. 697) found in their systematic review of non-prescription antimicrobial use worldwide, “[c]lear evidence that antimicrobials obtained without prescription are used less appropriately than prescription antimicrobials does not exist”.
Prescribing is a social exchange (Hall, 1980) and “cannot be easily disengaged from its larger social and cultural contexts” (Pellegrino, 1976). Its legitimacy is contextually assessed, by both patients and prescribers, based on social and medical factors (Stevenson et al., 2002) and thus the act of prescribing at the end of the therapeutic encounter often goes beyond strictly medical purposes. Hence, the repeated argument that the over-prescription of antibiotics is mainly driven by ‘patient demand’ needs to be further deconstructed and analysed in concrete contextual circumstances. As Britten (2008) has pointed out, doctors’ perceptions of patients’ expectations can have a greater influence on prescription patterns than patients’ actual expectations. As empirical examples from Maputo have illustrated, when individuals are not able to solve health-related problems through self-care (or community help) and they decide to navigate the challenges inherent to any public healthcare service in a resource-poor setting, they do expect medical solutions. However, if these solutions—often materialised in prescriptions—are not accompanied by other equally valued elements such as time, care and good communication, important in the construction of a trusting relationship (see Rodrigues, 2016, p. 397), then individuals may leave the consultation room with doubts. Doubts that will, eventually, influence how (if at all) they will use the prescribed solutions. Therefore, prescriptions need to be discussed between prescribers and users to ensure that the most adequate solution to individuals’ life-worlds (Schutz, 1972) and to their socioeconomic conditions is found (see also Zola, 1972).
Finally, as is widely recognised (WHO, 1998), pharmacy workers play an important role in self-medication practices, including in the management of prescribed medicines. They act not only as dispensers, but as sources of information and points of healthcare (see also Ferguson, 1981; Logan, 1988; Kamat and Nichter, 1998). Particularly in contexts where public health services are overloaded and often lack human and technological/material resources, such as Maputo and other LMICs, going directly to a pharmacy is often seen as the most cost-effective solution. The ongoing and growing competition in the pharmacy business in ‘loosely regulated’ contexts (Hardon and Sanabria, 2017), however, results in pharmacy workers feeling pressured to satisfy their clients, which may sometimes conflict with their role as health professionals. Hence, the involvement of pharmacy workers in programmes aimed at improving antibiotic use is important (Saradamma et al., 2000). Yet, while most recommendations to strengthen restrictions on self-medication with antibiotics emphasise the lack of policy enforcement to prohibit OTC sales (e.g., Mitema, 2010; Llor and Bjerrum, 2014), cautions on the balance between restriction and access and the need to consider geographical inequalities have also been raised (e.g., Bloom et al., 2015; Lambert, 2016; Laxminarayan et al., 2016; Khan et al., 2018). Indeed, regulatory measures need to be adjusted to local realities. In resource-limited settings, pharmacies may be the most reliable providers of both general healthcare and life-saving medicines. Moreover, the availability of antibiotics through illegal or informal channels may represent an even bigger challenge. The circulation of unsafe, substandard and/or counterfeit antimicrobials, often dispensed by untrained and uncredited sellers, is a challenge in many countries in the African region and, it has been argued, may accelerate and spread AMR (Ndihokubwayo et al., 2013). These realities need to be considered in regulatory measures and interventions.
The quantitative and qualitative data supporting this paper were collected during a total of ten months of fieldwork in Maputo city, divided into two phases. The first phase of data collection (2013–2014) included observations of client–provider interactions in pharmacies, exploratory interviews and informal conversations with practitioners and representatives from different health-related organisations, the conducting of seven focus group discussions (FGDs, n = 42), and the application of a household survey (n = 265, one person per household) in fifteen randomly selected neighbourhoods in Maputo city. The questionnaires were applied by 8 undergraduates studying sociology at the Eduardo Mondlane University (UEM). These students were trained, supervised and accompanied to the neighbourhoods by the author. The survey respondents had multiple religious and ethnic backgrounds; their ages ranged from 18 to 87 years (mean 34); 68.7% were female and 31.3% were male; a slight majority was employed (37.7%) and/or students (27.9%). Besides their housing characteristics (and the neighbourhoods they lived in), respondents’ economic conditions were also measured based on the ownership of durable home assets and access to services. This was assessed on the basis of 11 items (adapted from the socioeconomic indicator used in MISAU, INE, and ICFI, 2011), ranging from the most common—such as electricity, piped water, TV and radio—to the scarcest— such as access to the Internet, a car, a motorcycle or a bicycle. While half of the respondents had access to the five most common items, only 9% possessed them all. Socioeconomic status differed significantly according to the district the respondents lived in (with a higher concentration of individuals with more possessions/access in the more affluent areas in the city centre), and it was positively related to their educational level (the higher the level of education, the higher their economic status). The quantitative data were analysed using IBM SPSS Statistics 20.
In the second phase of fieldwork (2016), more in-depth qualitative data were collected. Repeat follow-up interviews (2 to 3 encounters) were conducted with 17 participants (15 from the household survey and 2 from the FGDs) and 10 key informants (including practitioners from different health-related organisations) to explore further the main initial findings. The 17 in-depth interviewees were selected from 10 different neighbourhoods in Maputo city, ranging from more affluent and semi-affluent areas of the city centre to more peripheral neighbourhoods (where most study participants lived) as described above, with an attempted balance in terms of sex (nine men and eight women), age (from 21 to 59) and school level (from 10th [secondary] grade to university studies). All interviews were recorded and transcribed. After an initial thematic analysis (Green and Thorogood, 2014), a phenomenological approach (Schutz, 1972) was used to look at individuals’ experiences when managing common ailments, and their interactions with health professionals – both prescribers and dispensers. Particular emphasis was also given to their perceptions of risk and safety, and (un)certainties regarding antibiotic use and self-medication practices, based on various and multifaceted knowledge and information sources. As I will explore later in this paper, the lack of a shared understanding around the term ‘antibiotic’, as detected during the exploratory phase of the study, required some adjustments to be made to how the questions were framed, both in the questionnaires and in the follow-up interviews. In the household survey, when asked about the last antibiotic used, backup examples of common terms among the community, as well as the most common antibiotics in Maputo were provided. Despite the precautions taken, it is important to acknowledge that this vocabulary dissonance may have influenced some of the information shared by the study participants, as analysed in the following section.
In Maputo, the research project was hosted by the Department of Sociology (through the Health and Society Research Group), Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, UEM. It received formal ethical approval from the Institutional Committee on Bioethics for Health of the Faculty of Medicine and Maputo Central Hospital (CIBS_FM&HCM), as well as all the required administrative permissions. Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals from the community who participated in the FGDs, the household survey and the individual interviews. All other informants gave oral consent. Apart from the face-to-face application of the household questionnaires, all data collection was undertaken by the author.
