Investigating the effect of clinical history before electrocardiogram interpretation on the visual behavior and interpretation accuracy of clinicians
We examine the impact of the presentation of a patient’s clinical history on subsequent visual appraisal and interpretation accuracy of electrocardiograms (ECGs). Healthcare-practitioners (N = 31) skilled in 12-lead ECG interpretation took part in a repeated-measures experiment with counterbalancing viewing 9 ECGs on a computer screen in two separate conditions: with/without an associated patient-history. A Hellinger-distance calculation was applied using a permutation test to eye-movement transitions at two granularity levels: between the ECG leads, and between smaller grid-cells, whose size was determined via data-driven clustering of the fixation points. Findings indicate that presentation of clinical-history does affect accuracy of interpretation in one ECG. Visual-behavior differed as a function of both history presentation and accuracy when considering transitions between the data-driven grid units (using a fine granularity, and able to show attention to parts of the waveform). Differences in visual-behavior at waveform level demonstrate an influence of patient-history and expertise that are not detected at the lead level. Visual-behaviour differs according to whether a patient-history is presented, and whether a clinician provides an accurate interpretation. This difference is evident in how the waveform itself is viewed, and is less present at the coarse granularity of visual transitions between leads. To understand how clinicians interpret ECGs, and potentially other medical images, visual transitions should be considered at a fine level of granularity, determined in a data-driven fashion.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a common test used in many areas of clinical practice, with over 300 million ECGs carried out per year in Europe1. Failure to correctly interpret an ECG can lead to an incorrect medical diagnosis and subsequent administration of inappropriate (or no) treatment1,2. The ECG displays waves of electrical activity resulting from the depolarization and repolarization of cells in the myocardium3. The 12-lead ECG represents this signal data in 12 different channels, called ‘leads’. Automated/computerized methods that are used to generate a clinical interpretation have been shown to be less accurate than humans4, despite ongoing improvements in automated interpretation since their inception in the 1960’s5. As a result of this, many cardiology organizations, such as the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association counsel against the use of computer interpretation of ECGs without expert human oversight6. An incorrect computerized interpretation is more likely to be accepted by over-readers than primary readers. This may result from not having direct access to the patient, or other relevant clinical information, such as the patient’s clinical history7. Clinical mismanagement, including potentially dangerous or inappropriate treatment has occurred when less experienced practitioners fail to identify interpretation errors and accept automated diagnostic information without question4.
Current research in the medical domain is considering approaches to enhance human accuracy, rather than supersede it with technology. Such methods keep the human ‘in-the-loop’, and promise to enhance human and machine interaction by leveraging the advantages of both paradigms. Observation of visual behaviour via eye tracking, which provides an objective means of assessing perception, cognition and performance, is a useful tool in linking human and machine interpretation. Methods include machine learning analysis combining human gaze information with image content to enhance breast imaging diagnostics8.
Eye-tracking has previously been applied to medical images (such as x-rays and mammograms) to understand how they are viewed by both experts and novices9,10,11. Eye-tracking has also more recently been used to gain insights into differences between the visual behavior of experts and novices, and those making correct and incorrect interpretations as they view ECGs12,13,14.
An eye-tracking study by Wood et al.13 also explored the effect of including clinical history with some of the ECGs as they were viewed by experts (consultant emergency medics, n = 10) and novices (final year medical students, n = 10). Sixteen ECGs were used with clinical histories provided for half (n = 8) of the ECGs. No time limit was imposed during the study. Areas of Interest were defined around leads that 2 clinicians believed to be the most important leads for interpreting the condition presented for each ECG. Findings suggest that the clinical history had no significant effect on ECG abnormality detection. The study did not however present each ECG with and without the associated clinical history, so the results may have been affected by confounding factors, such as learning effect/fatigue which are acknowledged by the authors.
In this paper we explore whether presenting clinical history affects interpretation accuracy and visual behavior, addressing some of the limitations of the study carried out by Wood et al.13. We analyse visual transition behaviour at a coarse level of granularity (between leads) and at a finer level of granularity, between units of a grid whose size is determined in a data-driven fashion, via clustering of the gaze data. The results show that transitions between units of the grid vary significantly according to both history presentation and interpretation accuracy, but no difference is detected when considering visual transitions between leads. This indicates that the differences in visual behaviour occur in how people view the morphology of the waveform, rather than how they make comparisons between leads. Although we do not see a difference in interpretation accuracy according to history presentation, the fact that significant differences in fine-grained visual behaviour are detected indicates that presenting history does make a difference to how people interpret ECGs, and that to understand its effects via observation of visual behaviour, it is important to use a method that captures within-lead transitions, as well as between-lead transitions.
We report the results of the participants’ overall accuracy as a function of history presentation, followed by the fixation duration and count metrics. Finally, we present the results of the visual transition permutation tests. Where multiple statistical tests were carried out, the generally more conservative Bonferroni correction was used to control for type I error rate18. All analysis presented was carried out using the R project for statistical computing version 3.1.119.
The average interpretation accuracy across all ECGs (Figure. 3 left) for all participants was 64% (SD = 27). Figure 3 (right) shows the overall accuracy for the two groups (history and no-history). Participant 2 (P2M) failed to correctly interpret any of the ECGs in either condition (Participant 2 - the only non-clinical participant did not have a clinical role in ECG interpretation but identified that they did interpret ECGs as part of their role as a medical scientist). The proportion of correct and incorrect results (Wilcoxon test) was not significantly different between the history and no-history groups (V = 84.5, p = 0.720).
(left) Boxplot of overall percentage accuracy (all participants), (right) accuracy per group (outliers labeled).
When examining the results on a per-ECG basis using a McNemar’s chi-squared for repeated measures data (Table 3), a difference between the history and no-history group can be seen in the LBBB stimuli. The history for this ECG - “65 year old male. Smoker. Sweaty. Vomiting. Discomfort in jaw and shoulders”, describes a potential acute coronary syndrome. And LBBB in the presence of chest pain should be treated as a medical emergency3.
Mean fixation duration – the average length of a single fixation – can be used as a proxy for cognitive load, where longer fixations indicate increased cognitive load20. The mean fixation duration did not differ significantly between the two groups when compared with a Wilcoxon test with Bonferroni correction (α = 0.005) (Figure. 4 and Table 4), suggesting that the presence of clinical history had no significant impact on the cognitive load entailed in interpreting the ECG.
Mean fixation duration for both conditions per ECG (error bars = SE).
A Wilcoxon test with Bonferroni correction (α = 0.005) was also carried out on the frequency of fixations (fixation count) for the history and no-history conditions. No significant differences were found between the conditions in any of the ECGs (Figure. 5 and Table 4).
Mean fixation count for both conditions per ECG (error bars = SE).
In order to determine if the differences in transitional behavior represent real differences between the groups, permutation tests were used to see if there was something “special” about the initial group differences when compared to the differences in groups generated at random with a permutation test. When comparing visual transitions in the history and no history conditions (Table 5), we see that significant differences are detected when using the grid cells as AOIs, but not the leads. The largest noticeable differences were seen in the subgroup analysis that compared accuracy sub-groups between the primary history and no-history groups. This was the case for:
correct and incorrect
correct and correct
incorrect and incorrect
between the group that saw history first and the group that saw history last (Appendix).
When looking at the lead transitions, the lowest p value (0.2) can be seen for the Right Bundle Branch (RBBB) condition as shown in Figure. 6. Further to history and no-history a sub-group analysis was carried out comparing accuracy sub groups to the primary history and no-history groups (see appendix). Differences can be seen between the accuracy groups in most conditions. One condition, RBBB in the sub-group analysis (Appendix) shows differences in accuracy in both the top-down (Hd = 0.67, p = 0.06) and bottom-up groups (Hd = 0.81, p < 0.001). This stimulus also had a clinical history especially evocative of a pulmonary embolism (PE). When considering the differences based on accuracy of interpretation alone (Table 6), greater differences (Hd) and smaller p-values can be seen between correct and incorrect participants using the grid method. A significant difference (p < 0.05) can be seen in the Anterior ST-segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) suggesting that regardless of history there was a greater difference in visual transitional behaviour between the correct and incorrect groups for this condition.
Lead transition matrices for the RBBB condition. (Left) saw history then ECG, (right) saw ECG alone (normalized by max value).
We set out to examine the effect of clinical history on both accuracy of interpretation and visual behavior. Did the way people viewed the ECG subsequently change because of the inclusion or exclusion of a patient’s clinical history? Further to this we explored the impact of using AOIs at two levels of granularity. Researcher-defined AOIs were mapped onto the ECG leads. These leads represent different separate semantic areas that contain views of the heart’s electrical activity based on the direction of the electrical impulses in relation to the position of the surface electrodes3,21. We contrasted this with a bottom-up data-driven method for segregation of the stimulus space into different AOIs. In all cases the grid cell dimensions were smaller than the lead level AOIs. Certain ECG leads can be of more or less importance in making a correct interpretation depending on the underlying condition. ECG literature and training texts regularly cite different leads as being the best locations to view morphological changes associated with specific pathology3,21. To this end the STEMI (ST-elevation myocardial infarction) conditions are of particular relevance, as cross referencing changes to the ST-segment of the ECG waveform in certain lead territories is necessary to distinguish a STEMI from other differential diagnosis involving ST-elevation, such as pericarditis21. Knowledge from ECG training material and clinical practice also highlights the need to potentially cross-reference leads, but additionally also cross-reference individual components of the ECG waveform within a lead itself. This requires the study and comparison of different waveform components, such as the various waves, intervals and segments. Which part of the waveform that pathological morphological changes occur in depends on the underlying condition itself3. Without making an arbitrary decision about which sub-components of the waveform to focus on, it becomes practically infeasible to map all parts of potential interest for subsequent analysis. To overcome arbitrary selection, we introduced a grid method to segregate the stimulus space based on values from a clustering algorithm.
This suggests that for these stimuli - details within the leads were more significant in terms of identifying visual behavior differences between the history and no-history groups. Clustering has been used to segregate stimuli in previous work22,23. Previous approaches have however created AOIs that differ in size and/or overlap making direct comparison of the regions difficult or inappropriate.
Medical history provides useful information about the underlying medical condition. Previous work has identified that an increased level of rhythm assessment can be accounted for by having prior knowledge of the patient7, making this a useful factor to consider when examining interpretation accuracy. The effect of clinical history on accuracy is still debatable with some studies determining an effect, i.e. Hatala et al.24, who found a 4–12% improvement in accuracy with clinical history and Wood et al.13 who found no difference. Some of the variation in these findings could relate to the strength of association between know symptoms and certain conditions. An example can be seen in the sub group analysis of the RBBB condition in the study presented in this paper with a clinical history that is very suggestive of a pulmonary embolism secondary to a deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Without this history a RBBB pattern is all that can be discerned from the ECG alone. Of the 11 times PE was stated or queried as a possible interpretation, only one participant referred to a possible PE in the no-history group, with the other 10 participants all being in the group that saw the history. This suggests that at least in this case the clinical history was highly suggestive of a specific pathology. This could also be a sign of confirmation bias, with practitioners seeking confirmatory information to back up their initial diagnosis25.
The commonly used eye-tracking metrics (such as fixation duration/count) that are used as proxies of behavior20 did not detect any significant differences between the conditions in terms of the average length of time they were fixated on or the number of fixations made.
The systematic application of history to all conditions, and presenting them both with and without the history has overcome some of the limitations of the study carried out by Wood et al.13. The grid method of AOI generation allows for examination of visual behavior at a finer level of granularity than the lead-based analysis due to the increased number of AOIs generated. There may be several grid cells inside a single lead, making the analysis sensitive to within-lead transitions in this case. It is possible that the grid generated could have been larger than the lead. In this case it could be entire regions, or combinations of leads that would be captured.
The clinical history does appear to have an impact on ECG interpretation accuracy in some cases and on visual transitions between leads. One reason why this effect is not more widespread, despite the stimuli being primarily representative of myocardial infarctions that would require lead comparisons is that the bottom-up saliency of the STEMI conditions overrides the vaguer top-down knowledge provided by the histories describing chest pain (Table 2). In contrast to this, interpretation accuracy and visual behavior are both affected at the level of the waveform morphology. This indicated that at the level of the waveform participants react differently on a cognitive and perceptual level. This also makes some sense from a clinical perspective, as a history of chest pain may prompt visual analysis of the ST-segment within leads.
The implications of this are that visual analysis of the waveform components is influenced by the clinical history provided and does impact the way the waveform is subsequently perceived. This implies that regardless of the need to cross reference leads the cross-referencing of the waveform components themselves is of more importance for accuracy of interpretation.
From a clinical standpoint, practitioners are trained to look for morphological changes in the waveform itself, and so intra-lead transitions that are not detected when analyzing transitions at the level of the lead are more relevant and discriminatory of accuracy. This suggests that the level of granularity that is best for analyzing differences in visual behavior is one that considers behavior within leads, as well as between them, which is supported by clinical training courses and texts that teach practitioners to look at the components of the waveform and compare them.
